[Na. Da. A.] Rudradhyaya | 97

Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya: The Rishi of "Ma nastoke" is Bhagavan. Chhandas is Jagati. The deity is also Bhagavan Himself.

"Ma nastoke": O Rudra, do not harm ('ma ririshah') our son (tokam) or his son (tanaye). Do not be a harmer through diseases etc. regarding them. (Grammatical note on cases). Do not harm the son or grandson. According to the Chandogya: "Life is 116 years...". Some say 120 years, others 127, others 100. Do not harm that life. Do not harm our cows, buffaloes, etc. Similarly, do not harm our horses, elephants, etc. And do not kill our heroes. 'Bhamitah' means even if provoked to anger by our offenses. 'Virah' means progeny; its repetition is for the sake of getting good sons. Or 'Virah' means the valiant and steady ones. (Grammatical derivation of 'bhamitah'). Or even if you are angry at our offenses, do not kill. For that purpose, we, bringing offerings like Charu and Purodasha, serve you with salutations. (Grammatical note on cases). We serve You. || 6 ||

[Purashcharana for this Mantra]: Having performed a Kricchra penance, chant the mantra 1,000 times over cow-ghee in an Udumbara vessel. Sacrifice 8,000 times in fire (kindled or produced by friction), then sacrifice with Mahavyahritis. Having eaten the remains of the hundred offerings, fast for three nights and then eat Charu. Then chant 50,000 times. Give five nishkas to the Guru. Then the Purashcharana is complete. For kings desiring long life: A king should daily sacrifice 10,000 offerings of sesame seeds smeared with ghee in the kindled fire. Eight Brahmins should take ash enchanted 800 times and perform protection of the king in the eight directions. This should be done daily. Another method: Sacrifice 10,000 white lotuses smeared with curd, honey, and ghee. This should be done by 11 Brahmins who have mastered the mantra or have achieved immediate success. The method for immediate success: Having received the mantra from the Acharya and fasted for three nights, chant continuously for three nights; then one becomes immediately successful/fit for the ritual. By doing this, the king's prosperity increases. Sacrifice 10,000 Durva grasses smeared with ghee daily; the king will be long-lived. Enchant 800 or 108 pots filled with water (of gold, silver, or copper), worship with scents etc., wrap with new cloth, and perform other rituals. The Acharya should bathe the king on his birth-day with as many pots. By doing this, the king becomes free from physical defects and even sins. For the king's growth, a single Brahmin should daily chant 8,000 times. || 13 ||
