94 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. Da. A.]

(Sayanacharya continued): Whatever peace and happiness and separation from suffering he obtained, may we reach all that by Your guidance and great affection, O Rudra. || 4 ||

Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya: Now the second [of this set]: "Mrida no rudra". O Rudra, make us happy; make us happy with the abundance of sons, wealth, etc. (Grammatical notes). And also ('uta') grant us happiness ('mayas') which is of the nature of unsurpassed bliss. 'Kshayadviraya' is explained. We serve ('vidhema') you, the destroyer of enemies, with salutations or with offerings like Charu and Purodasha. 'Vidhati' refers to the act of serving. Just as we always serve You, in the same way, make us happy and give us bliss. Or: O Rudra, make us happy and give us bliss; for that purpose, we serve you. (Grammatical note on cases). Thus the attainment of happiness is prayed for. Now the removal of suffering is sought: 'Sham' is the pacification of future causes of suffering. 'Yoh' is the separation/non-emergence of future causes of suffering. Or 'Yoh' is separation. (Grammatical derivation). Whatever peace ('sham') and separation ('yoh') Manu, the all-knowing father of subjects (Prajapati), appointed by You, obtained through sacrifice ('ayaje')—meaning, he gave within limits/distributed according to Varna and Ashrama—may he thus remove our suffering. (Grammatical notes on 'ayaje'). Some say 'ayaje' means he took or accepted as his own. May we attain that through your grace; may we not be negligent. Even if there is negligence, may we not suffer the defect of transgression by your grace. (Grammatical notes on 'ashyam'). He gives the reason: "Tava rudra pranitau". The repetition of 'Rudra' is for extreme focus. O Rudra, because we live under Your governance ('pranitau'). Or when there is Your grace ('pranitau') towards us, caused by the servant-master relationship, then may we attain that. (Grammatical notes). Others say: The well-known Manu, appointed by You, who is like a father to the subjects because of his benevolence—may we attain the kind of removal of suffering that he established, because we serve You. Others say: Whatever twofold removal of suffering Manu, the all-knowing father of the worlds, Prajapati, praised and accepted—may we attain those two and be the recipients of such protection. || 1 ||
