68 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. Da. A.]

He states the first Rik:

O driver of the vile state! O Lord of food! O Detached one! O Blue-necked and Red one! Do not terrify these our men, nor these our cattle. Let none of these perish or be diseased. || 1 ||

Sayanacharya Bhashya: 'Drapih' is one who causes the vile path (hell for sinners). 'Andhasas pate' is the Lord/protector of food (andhas). He protects the food of devotees. 'Daridrat' means one without possessions, detached, or alone. As the Shruti says: "Brahman is one without a second." 'Nilalohitah' is blue in the neck and red elsewhere. O Rudra, addressed by these names! Do not terrify ('ma bheh') the prosperity of these our men (sons, grandsons, etc.) and these our cattle (cows, buffaloes, etc.). Let not even one thing among all these mentioned perish ('ma aras'). Let none of them be diseased ('mo amamat'). || 1 ||

Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya: The Rishi of "Drape andhasaspate" is Pulaha. The Chhandas is Astara-pankti. The deity is Shri Rudra. After praising the Lord in His universal form, he now asks for fearlessness:

'Drape': O driver of the vile state of suffering or poverty, which is the result of bad deeds. Or the driver of the pitiable state of the end of the world. 'Dra' means vile path/motion. (Grammatical derivation). Or 'Drapih' is a name for a cloak; by metaphor it refers to one having it. 'Andhasaspate': 'Andhas' is food. Lord/Master of that. 'Daridrat': One without possessions or attachments. Even being the Lord of food, He is detached. (Grammatical note on accents). 'Nilalohita': Rudra appearing from the heart of the Lord is Nilalohita; He who performed the act of begging, etc. Half blue and half red due to the male-female nature. Or because of having name and form. Others say: Blue in the neck and red elsewhere. Or 'Nila' means one whose impurities are completely removed. Thus addressing the Lord, he asks for fearlessness: 'Esham Purusharam': Our sons, etc. 'Esham Pashuram': Our cows, etc. 'Ma Bheh': Do not terrify them. 'Ma Aras': Do not let them perish or suffer. (Grammatical explanation for 'aras' and 'amamat'). Let no disease (amamat) strike them. || 1 ||
