[Na. E. A.] Rudradhyaya | 109

(Ritual procedures continued): Having taken the remaining water and throwing it into a river, sacrifice pure rice smeared with ghee in the kindled fire at its bank; this pacifies/prevents death. One traveling in a great forest should enchant ash 8,000 times and anoint his entire body with it before going; he will have no fear of any kind. On the night of the 14th day of the dark fortnight, in a cemetery, offer a sacrifice (bali) of cat meat with cooked rice, saying "I offer this sacrifice to the Rakshasas"; then there will be no fear from them. To appease the anger of a king or ruler, sacrifice 8,000 offerings of ghee in front of a golden image of the great ruler. Offer a sacrifice of cock meat. Give new clothes, gold, etc., as Dakshina for the Homa. Three gold nishkas or one, or the 108th part of the kingdom should be given. For others afflicted by divine causes, sacrifice 8,000 offerings of ghee with this mantra; divine disturbances will perish. Meditation:

"One should meditate on the great Lord of all worlds, holding all weapons, adorned with all ornaments, the remover of all sins."

Thus ends the Tenth Anuvaka in the Yajurveda Bhashya of Shri Rudra Prashna composed by Shri Bhatta Bhaskara. || 10 ||
|| Thus ends the Tenth Anuvaka ||

Sayanacharya Bhashya: In the tenth Anuvaka, some mantras in the form of Rik (verses) were stated. Now, in the eleventh Anuvaka, the remaining Riks and Yajus are stated. First, there are ten Riks.

He states the first Rik:

The thousands of thousands of Rudras who are upon the earth—their bows, at a distance of a thousand leagues, we unbend. || 1 ||

Sayanacharya Bhashya: Those Rudras who are on the earth (bhumyam), in thousands of kinds (sahasrashah) and numbering in the thousands (sahasrani). 'Sahasrashah' indicates the class. Classes like Vinayakas, mountains, etc., are all special forms of Rudra. In each class, there are many thousands of forms. The bows (dhanvani) of all of them, at a distance of a thousand leagues (sahasrayojane) from us—meaning, in a distant place—we unbend (ava tanmasi); we place them with their strings unfastened. || 1 ||
