[Na. Pra. Am.] Rudradhyaya. 17

...moves along to bring about sunrise and sunset. The purpose of Rudra's holding this form in the solar disc is stated: and also (uta-api) the cowherds (gopa), who are without the refinement of the Veda and scriptures, see (adrashan) this Rudra in the form of the Sun in the disc. Women who carry water (udaharyah) also see him. And also, all beings (vishva bhutani)—all creatures including cows, buffaloes, etc.—see this Rudra in the form of the Sun in the disc. Indeed, Rudra's holding of the Sun-form is only for the sake of being seen by all. The form of Rudra in Kailasa etc., however, is seen only by those learned in the Veda and scriptures, not by others. May such a Rudra, being seen, make us happy (mridayati), make us joyous. (8)

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: Now the second. Showing him directly, he says 'Asau'. That Rudra who is the self of the Sun. 'Avasarpati'—moves downward. At the time of sunset, he appears as if going down. Or, 'avasarpati' means he moves to another region. 'Nilagriva'—one whose throat is adorned with the Kalakuta poison. 'Vilohita'—himself especially red, like blazing fire. Or, both 'nilagriva' and 'vilohita' are adjectives for the Sun. 'Griva' are the rays (rashmayah) because they swallow (grasanti) water. Because he takes water at the time of rising and goes to the end, his rays which are blue due to contact with darkness appear thus at that time. Or, 'nilagriva' means one whose rays are hidden (nilina). 'Vilohita' means variously red; for at the time of sunrise and sunset, the disc appears red as if due to contact with darkness. Now, the God, conducting the worldly journey through sunrise and sunset, is famous even to children and cowherds. He is not like other forms of the God which are established only through scriptures etc.—to show this, he says: and also (uta-api) the cowherds (gopa), who are the primary examples of the ignorant, saw him. And similarly, the water-carriers (udaharyah)—the servant women with pots, who are lowlier than even the cowherds. Why is this mentioned separately? To show that all the greatness of the God is present even in those who are like cowherds—he says: 'vishva bhutani'—all beings saw this God in the form of the Lord. Those who find it hard to know him through the Shrutis etc., see him with their eyes; may that God, being thus seen and experienced directly by everyone, make us happy (mridayati), give us joy. Some explain 'avasarpati' as referring to the God himself (moving towards the devotee).
...
