52  Sayanacharya—Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya-Sahita— [Na. Cha. Am.]

|| Thus in the Vedartha-prakasha, the commentary on the Yajur-samhita composed by Sayanacharya-Madhava, in the fourth Kanda, fifth Prapathaka, the commentary on the Sri Rudram, ends the Fourth Anuvaka. ||

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: 'Namah shvabhyah'—to those who hold the form of dogs. [Grammatical note on the word 'shvabhyah']. 'Shvapatibhyashcha vo namah'—to the Masters of dogs, or to those in the form of the Guardian of the Field (Kshetrapala). [Grammatical note]. Salutation to you who are of such forms. Some say: all these are indeed specific classes/species who are recipients of the grace of the Supreme Lord earned through various forms of worship. (17)

Now for the Purashcharana of this anuvaka: having performed the twelve-night Krichhra and its half (at-krichhra), one should chant nine thousand times. Then, in a temple of Shiva, one should perform eight thousand circumambulations, chanting continuously until the circumambulations are completed. Then one becomes a perfected practitioner (krita-purashcharana). Here, days etc. need not be considered; it should be done whenever there is interest. A person afflicted by consumption (rajayakshma) should hire a perfected twice-born (Brahmin) and perform a peace-rite (shanti). Then, the Brahmin should make an altar of one cubit (bahu-matra) in the fire-place of the one having it done, in one part of his house. Having made a platform in front of it, and having placed a new pot filled with water and wrapped in thread there, he should invoke the God with this anuvaka. Having worshipped with perfumes etc.—perfume, camphor, lotus flower, incense made of ten ingredients like Ushira, and a lamp with ghee—and having worshipped his own self as that reality, he should perform it for eleven days of initiation. On the starting day, having completed up to the mantra-pushpa, he should offer eleven times for each salutation with ghee using the anuvaka, and chant twenty-one thousand times in its presence. Then, from that time until the end, the fire should be preserved. On the day after that, having performed daily rites, one should offer eleven times with the anuvaka using sesame, fried grain (laja), Durva grass, rice, and barley, soaked in ghee and honey. Thus for three days, one should offer daily with honey and ghee. Then for two days, the seventh and eighth, there is the offering of Ashvattha and Apamarga wood as before. Then for one day, from sunrise until sunset, one should chant the anuvaka continuously while not opposing necessary daily duties. Then on the ninth day, an offering of honey and ghee. On the tenth day, one should chant from sunrise to sunset. Then on the day of completion, one should worship the God with eight thousand lotus flowers for each salutation with this anuvaka. Then, having worshipped Gauri, one should say to the Brahmins, "Let there be release from the suffering/offering." At the time of gift-giving, eight thousand or four thousand or eight hundred (coins) for a king; for others, eight hundred or four hundred or twenty-five Nishkas. Thus a separate gift for each. Then a Dakshina for the labor must be given: one Nishka per day. Then also a cow should be given as the 'all-encompassing' (sarva) Dakshina. Having thus finished, one should bid farewell to the God. The procedure is the same for those building temples etc. Then, one should bathe him or sprinkle him with the water from the pot. By this, consumption (rajayakshma) perishes. By the grace of the Auspicious One (Shiva), he becomes long-lived. With this very anuvaka, the peace for urinary diseases (meha) is stated. One afflicted by such disease should offer honey and ghee into his own fire...
...
