102 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. Da. A.]

He states the ninth Rik:

May the weapon of Rudra avoid us. May the ill-will of the fierce and sinful one avoid us. O Bountiful one, unbend your firm bows from us. O Showerer of desires, make our children and grandchildren happy. || 9 ||

Sayanacharya Bhashya: 'Hetih' is the weapon by which one strikes. May Rudra's weapon avoid ('pari vrinaktu') us; let it keep away from us. Meaning, let it never strike us. May the ill-will ('durmatih')—the fierce intellect—of Rudra, who is fierce ('tveshasya') and desires sin/suffering ('aghayoh') for those to be punished, also avoid us. Whatever firm bows You have to destroy opponents—O Bountiful one ('maghavan')—unbend them ('avatanushva') from us (the sacrificers). O 'Midhuh' (Showerer of desires), make our son ('tokaya') and his son ('tanayaya') happy. || 9 ||

Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya: The Chhandas of "Pari no rudrasya" is Trishtubh. Rishi and Devata are Bhagavan Himself. Here too, because of the fierce form, the first and second halves are indirect and direct respectively.

"Pari no rudrasya": 'Hetih' is a weapon. May Rudra's weapon avoid ('pari vrinaktu') us and our sons and grandsons. (Grammatical notes). Furthermore, may the ill-will ('durmatih')—the intellect of punishment—of the Lord who is 'tveshasya' (glowing with anger) and 'aghayoh' (desiring suffering for sinful men) also avoid us. The prayer is: "May we not be sinful men who are to be punished." (Grammatical notes). Furthermore, 'sthira': firm bows. (Grammatical notes). Unbend ('avatanushva') the firm bow, meaning relax the string. Or unbend Your many bows. We pray for safety. 'Maghavadbhyah': For the sake of those having wealth (in the form of Havis). Unbend the bow for them; do not harm them. Who harms a sacrificer? The idea is: "Just as we, the offerers of Havis, may be fearless worshippers of Yours, for that purpose, unbend the bow." Others say: "The firm intellect is referred to as 'durmatih'; that firm/unwavering ill-will should not be given to us." Relax it for the sake of the 'maghavat' (sacrificers). 'Midhuh': O Showerer of desires. Make our son ('tokaya') and his son ('tanayaya') happy. (Grammatical notes). || 9 ||
