2  Sayanacharya—Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya-Sahita— [Na. Ma. Am.]

...holding at knee-height (with 'Namo rudrebhyo ye prithivyam'); holding at navel-height (with 'Namo rudrebhyo ye antarikshe'); and holding at face-height (with 'Namo rudrebhyo ye divi'), and after offering, one makes the sacrificer (Yajamana) recite these. Having offered these in reverse order as 'Pratyarohas' (descents), one casts the Arka leaf on the path (samchara) of animals, or where the one whom he hates walks."

Introduction (Upodghata) by Bhatta Bhaskara.

Salutations to Shri Ganesha. Om. Henceforth begins the Agni-kanda (section on Fire), which is dedicated to Agni. There, at the last brick-piling, "one offers the Shatarudriya with 'Namaste rudra manyava...'. This Agni is indeed Rudra; he is born then," says the Brahmana text. "This Agni is indeed Rudra; these are his bodies," etc., and "He offers with goat's milk; one should offer with the milk of domestic animals," etc., says the Brahmana. "He offers with an Arka leaf." "The Angirases, going to the heavenly world," etc., says the Brahmana. There, this is the procedure of application (prayoga-krama): Standing facing North, holding (the oblation) at face-height, starting with "Namaste rudra manyave..." and reciting that anuvaka to the end, then the second and third, and up to where he recognizes "Namah kshatrubhyah" in the fourth, then he utters "Svaha" (and offers). Then moving East, holding at navel-height, starting from "Samgrahitribhyashcha vah..." and reciting the remainder of that anuvaka, then the fifth and sixth, and up to where he recognizes "Namo vashyarya cha" in the seventh, then he utters "Svaha". Then moving South, holding at knee-height, starting from "Namo vashyarya cha" and reciting the remainder of that anuvaka, then the eighth, ninth, and tenth, and up to where he recognizes "Ye etavantashcha" in the eleventh, then he utters "Svaha". "He offers divided into three," says the Brahmana. "He offers at such a height," etc. In that, there are eighty-one parts and ninety-six mantras. Then moving West, holding at ankle-height, having offered with "Namo rudrebhyo ye prithivyam," he makes the sacrificer recite it. "He offers the three higher oblations," says the Brahmana. "These deities are indeed heavenly, those which are the highest," etc. Holding at face-height (or eye-height), having offered with "Namo rudrebhyo ye divi," he makes the sacrificer recite it.

For this Rudradhyaya:
The Rishi (Seer) is the Lord (Bhagavan) Himself.
The Kanda-Rishi (Section-Seer) is Agni.
The Metre (Chhandas) is Mahavirat.
The Deity (Devata) is Shambhu (Shiva).
The Rishis etc. for each individual mantra will be mentioned during the explanation. This is the ritual procedure connected with the sacrifice (Yajna). Or, there are many applications (prayogas) famous in the Smritis and Puranas with results such as the path to liberation, destruction of sins, health, longevity, etc.; some of those will be mentioned. The specific applications for each mantra will be described later. There, in the Jabala Upanishad: "Then the students said to him: 'Tell us, by what chanting alone does one attain immortality?' That Yajnavalkya said: 'By the Shatarudriya.'" "These are indeed the names of Immortality; by these one becomes immortal." In the Kaivalya Upanishad: "He who studies the Shatarudriya becomes purified by fire..."
