26  Sayanacharya—Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya-Sahita— [Na. Dvi. Am.]

[Word-for-word]: Namah | hiranya-bahave | iti | hiranya-bahave | senanye | iti | sena-nye | disham | cha | pataye | namah || 1 ||

Sayana's Commentary: 'Hiranyabahu' is he who has ornaments made of gold on his arms. And 'senanyah' is he who leads the army in battles. Salutation be to Rudra who holds such a form. And salutation to Rudra who is the protector (lord) of the directions. (1)

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: For this anuvaka starting with 'Namo hiranyabahave', the Rishi is Manduka. The Metre is Maha-Gayatri. Rudra is the Deity. There, having pacified the Lord Rudra and his means of destruction through the first anuvaka, and having had them withdrawn, he now begins to praise and salute him in his universal form (vaishvarupya) through the next eight anuvakas. Regarding that, Shakapuni says: "In three anuvakas (2nd, 3rd, 4th), a single Yajus starts with 'Namah' and ends with 'Namah'." Yaska says: "The 'Namah' at the start is one Yajus, and the 'Namah' at the end is another Yajus." Kashakritsna says: "The eight anuvakas are eight (long) Yajus mantras." There, praise and salutation are for pairs of Rudras. As seen in the Shatapatha Brahmana: "One offers to two and two." Even in a single entity, the duality is established by imposing a difference based on eight different causes of salutation; where many are mentioned, one should be understood as an adjective for the others. For example: "Salutation to the golden-armed commander of armies, and to the lord of the directions." Among them, some have salutations at both ends (ubhayato-namaskara), and some have salutation at only one end. There is a Brahmana text on this: "Those Rudras which have salutations at both ends are more fierce (ghoratara). And those which have salutation at only one end are more peaceful (shantatara)." Formerly, when prayed to by Brahma for the sake of creation, the God created Rudras of similar nature to himself. It is said elsewhere: "Equal in creation, power, and wisdom." There, salutations are made to those attendants of the God (in plural forms); or in the singular forms, salutations are made everywhere to everything out of the suspicion that the God resides there.

Now we state the meters of the individual Yajus: for those of one syllable, Daivi Gayatri; two syllables, Daivi Ushnik; three syllables, Daivi Anushtup; four syllables, Daivi Brihati; five syllables, Daivi Pankti; six syllables, Daivi Trishtup or Yajushi Gayatri; seven syllables, Daivi Jagati or Yajushi Ushnik; eight syllables, Prajapatya Gayatri or Yajushi Anushtup; nine syllables, Yajushi Brihati or Asuri Jagati; ten syllables, Yajushi Pankti or Asuri Trishtup; eleven syllables, Yajushi Trishtup or Asuri Pankti; twelve syllables, Yajushi Jagati or Prajapatya Ushnik or Asuri Brihati. Or, the Gayatri of the Samas, etc., should be understood according to the scriptures. There, at the beginning, to show that "this universe which is yours, you are its Master, and no Master harms his own property," he establishes the God's Lordship over the universe (vishva-patitva). And because of its primacy, first the material...
...
