144 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Cha. Pra. A.]

Sayanacharya Bhashya: Fuel (idhma) and other sacrificial materials are well-known in the sacrifice section. 'Grihah' refers to the Patni-shala (the wife's shed) etc. 'Pachatah' refers to the Shamitra (the slaughtering fire) etc. 'Svagakara' is the 'Agnyuvaka' (the subsequent recitation). By that, the offerings reach the deities respectively.

Thus ends the Eighth Anuvaka in the Chamaka Bhashya of the Yajur-Samhita, Fourth Kanda, Fifth Prapathaka, in the Madhaviya Vedartha Prakasha composed by Sayanacharya. || 8 ||

He states the ninth Anuvaka:

May the Fire, the Gharma (Pravargya), the Arka sacrifice, the Surya sacrifice, the Prana offering, the Horse-sacrifice (Ashvamedha), the Earth, Aditi, Diti, the Heaven, the Shakvari verses (fingers), the directions—may all these be fit through sacrifice; may the Rik, the Saman, the Stoma, the Yajus, the initiation (diksha), the penance, the season, the vow, the rain of day and night, and the Brihat and Rathantara Samans be mine through sacrifice. || 9 ||

Sayanacharya Bhashya: 'Agni' is the fire being piled. 'Gharmah' is the Pravargya ritual. The sacrifice prescribed as "Purodasha for Indra-Arka" is 'Arka'. The sacrifice "Charu for Surya" is 'Surya'. The oblation "Svaha to Prana" is 'Prana'. The Horse-sacrifice is well-known. Earth and others are specific deities. 'Shakvari' refers to the fingers of the Cosmic Being (Virat-Purusha). The directions are East etc. and the intermediate directions as well. May all these be fit (kalpantam) for their respective functions through my sacrifice. Rik and others are specific types of mantras. 'Stoma' is a hymn consisting of Samans. 'Diksha' is the purification of the sacrificer. 'Tapah' is fasting etc. for the removal of sins. 'Ritu' is the time-period. 'Vratam' is the milk-vow etc. Let my crops be fit by the 'rain' ('vrishti') related to day and night. 'Brihat' and 'Rathantara' are two Samans. May they be fit for their respective usages through my sacrifice. || 9 ||

Thus ends the Ninth Anuvaka in the Chamaka Bhashya of the Yajur-Samhita, Fourth Kanda, Fifth Prapathaka, in the Madhaviya Vedartha Prakasha composed by Sayanacharya. || 9 ||
