53  Sayanacharya—Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya-Sahita— [Na. Pam. Am.]

...nine thousand oblations for each salutation; the urinary disease perishes. For others also, such as leprosy (kushtha) etc., one should chant the anuvaka a hundred thousand (lakh) times; the diseases perish. In case of fevers like sannipata etc., a capable Brahmin should stand in navel-deep water in a stream and throw six thousand red lotuses for each salutation. With the remainder, the Bhumi-ishti worship should be performed. When this is done, great fever perishes. Previously, the removal of consumption (rajayakshma) by this was stated. Because of its fierceness, only a learned Brahmin should be the Guru; otherwise, it results in conflict. Therefore, no omission (alopa) should be made.

Now, the Meditation (Dhyanam):
"One should meditate on Hara (Shiva), whose entire body is smeared with ashes, who is adorned with a mass of matted hair, three-eyed, mounted on a bull, and accompanied by the Lord of Attendants (Ganesha)."

|| Thus in the Yajurveda commentary composed by Sri Bhatta Bhaskara, in the Sri Rudra-prashna, ends the Fourth Anuvaka. ||
|| This Fourth Anuvaka is completed. ||

Sayana's Commentary: In the fourth anuvaka, the Yajus with salutations at both ends are completed. Now, in the anuvakas from the fifth to the end of the ninth, the Yajus are recited starting with salutations only. In the fifth anuvaka, he speaks fifteen Yajus, starting from the first.

Salutation to the source of existence and to the remover of sorrow. (1)

[Word-for-word]: Namah | bhavaya | cha | rudraya | cha || 1 ||

Sayana's Commentary: 'Bhavah'—because living beings arise (bhavanti) from him. 'Rudrah'—because he melts away (dravayati) the sorrow (rut) which is the cause of weeping. (1)

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: For the two anuvakas 'Namo bhavaya cha' and 'Namo jyeshthaya cha' (5th and 6th), the Rishi and Deity are Bhagavan Shambhu Himself. The Metre is Mahavirat. Thus, through the (previous) three anuvakas (2, 3, 4), the God's universal lordship (vishvadhipatyam) was established. From here on, the God is praised according to the distinctions of his eight forms (Ashta-murti). The salutations at both ends are gone. From here on, salutations are at one end. Among those, those with salutation at the beginning: 'Namo bhavaya cha rudraya cha'. He who exists (bhavati) everywhere and at all times is 'Bhavah'. [Grammatical note]. He indeed exists, and never at any time does he not exist. Or: he who manifests (bhavayati) everything, or is contemplated (bhavyate) by all. Or: he in whom everything exists. He is the presiding deity (adhishthata) of Water among the eight forms. 'Rudraya' has been explained. He is the presiding deity of the Sun (Surya). Therefore, he is recited again in the section on presiding deities. (1)

Salutation to the destroyer and to the lord of cattle. (2)
...
