136 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Cha. Pa. A.]

Sayanacharya Bhashya: 'Jyaishthyam' is the state of being most excellent. 'Adhipatyam' is ownership. 'Manyu' and 'Bhama' both refer to specific types of anger: one is mental, the other is external, manifested through signs like lack of patience. 'Amah' is the quality of being un-measurable, not being able to be limited by opponents. 'Ambhah' is water endowed with coolness and sweetness. 'Jema' is the power of victory. 'Mahima' is greatness, the abundance of wealth etc. gained through victory. 'Varima' is the state of being chosen/worshipped. 'Prathima' is the expanse of house, fields, etc. 'Varshma' refers to the bodies of sons, grandsons, etc. 'Draghuya' is length in terms of sons and grandsons—meaning, uninterrupted lineage. 'Iddham' is abundant food and wealth. 'Iddhih' is excellence through qualities like knowledge. 'Satyam' is truthful speech. 'Shraddha' is the belief that the next world exists. 'Jagat' refers to cattle etc., both moving and stationary. 'Dhanam' is gold etc. 'Vashah' is the state of everyone being under one's control. 'Tvishih' is the brilliance of the body. 'Krida' is gambling, games, etc. 'Modah' is the joy born from that. 'Jatam' are existing children. 'Janishyamanam' are future children. 'Suktam' is a collection of Rik verses. 'Sukritam' is the 'apurva' (unseen merit) born from good deeds. 'Vittam' is wealth already obtained. 'Vedyam' is all types of wealth to be obtained hereafter. 'Bhutam' are established assets like fields. 'Bhavishyat' is what will be attained. 'Sugam' is a place easily reached, like a village of relatives. 'Supatham' is a path free from thieves etc. 'Riddham' is increased wealth or the fruit of rituals performed. 'Riddhih' is the fruit of rituals to be performed. 'Krishtam' is the capable substance for one's work. 'Krishtih' is one's own capability. 'Matih' is the determination regarding objects. 'Sumatih' is the determination regarding difficult tasks like royal affairs. || 2 ||

Thus ends the Second Anuvaka in the Chamaka Bhashya of the Yajur-Samhita, Fourth Kanda, Eighth Prapathaka, in the Madhaviya Vedartha Prakasha composed by Sayanacharya. || 2 ||

He states the third Anuvaka:

May peace, happiness, dearness, object of desire, desire, kindness, auspiciousness, betterment, better wealth, fame, fortune, wealth, ruler, sustainer, safety, steadiness, everything, greatness, knowledge, teaching-power, procreation-power, impulse-power, plow, cessation (of obstacles), truth (ritual), fruit of ritual, absence of tuberculosis, absence of minor illness, medicine (life-cause), long-life, absence of enemies, fearlessness, good movement, bed (bedding), beautiful dawn, and a good day—may all these be mine through sacrifice. || 3 ||
