[Na. Tri. Am.] Rudradhyaya. 37

...the Rudra exists thus (in all things). To contemplate the universal selfhood of Rudra, it is spoken thus in the mantras. In the bodies of thieves etc., Rudra exists in two ways: in the form of the individual soul (jiva) and in the form of the Lord (Ishwara). There, the form of the individual soul is the expressed meaning (vachya-artha) of the words 'thief' (stena) etc. That alone is censured in the scriptures. The form of the Lord is indicated (lakshya) by the words 'thief' etc. The contemplation of that (Lordship) is the supreme goal of life as it is the cause for the destruction of sins. With the intention of conveying the indicated meaning, worldly words are used in the mantras—this is how it should be seen. Through the expressed meaning which acts as an indicator, the indicated meaning can be easily grasped even by the simple-minded. Just as in the expression "the moon is on the tip of the branch." Therefore, even when the indicated meaning is intended, words expressing the primary meaning must be used as a door to the primary understanding. (2)

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: 'Namah kakubhaya'—to the chief, the elevated one; or he who shines on the hump (kakuda) of the bull. [Grammatical note]. 'Nishangine'—to the expert in sword-striking. 'Stenanam pataye namah'—'stenas' are thieves whose bodies are hidden, who steal wealth. [Etymology]. Out of love for those who take refuge in him, even among thieves, he protects them as their Lord by removing their sins. Or: he is established in the midst of those who commit theft; there is no one equal to him in committing 'theft' (i.e., his mysterious taking away of things). (2)

He speaks the third Yajus:
Salutation to the one with a sword and a quiver, salutation to the lord of robbers. (3)

[Word-for-word]: Namah | nishangine | ishudhimate | iti | ishu-dhi-mate | taskaranam | pataye | namah || 3 ||

Sayana's Commentary: 'Nishanga' is an arrow held in the hand to be placed on the bow. 'Ishudhi' is the container of arrows bound on the back. Salutation to him who has both. 'Taskarah' are manifest (open) thieves; salutation to their protector. (3)

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: 'Namo nishangine'—to the one having constant attachment (sakti) to his devotees. 'Ishudhimate'—'nishanga' and 'ishudhi' have been explained; to him who has both. The word 'nishangi' is mentioned again to establish the possession of both. Or: 'nishanga' is extreme attachment. Carrying the desire for theft and the quiver. 'Taskaranam pataye namah'—those who reside in forests etc. and steal openly, like those who rob caravans, etc., are 'taskaras'. [Grammatical note on 'taskara']. (3)
...
