128 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. E. A.]

Alternatively, taking refuge in a Linga that faces the West (svayambhv-apara-mukham), and keeping silence for eleven days, chant this along with the supplementary parts. One should not see or touch domestic animals or vile persons. If one happens to see them, the object will turn to gold on the twelfth day.

Another method:
Starting from the 8th day of the dark fortnight until the 14th day, having smeared the sacrificial ground (sthandila) or a mat, the wise one should chant. Offering 1,000 offerings of ghee-Payasam to the Lord with the mantra "Namo astu nilagrivaya"—1,000 karshapanas (gold/silver coins) will be produced. Another: With the mantra "Pramuncha dhanvanah" according to the rules, sacrifice 1,000 pieces of food in the kitchen; the food will become inexhaustible. Another: With "Namo vah kirikebhyah", sacrifice 10,000 sesame seeds; 1,000 karshapanas will be produced. (From the Kalika Purana).

[For wealth]:
Shaunaka says: With the mantra "Asau yastamrah" and the following part, worship the Sun at both sunrise and sunset; he obtains inexhaustible wealth.

[Bodhayana says]:
Chanting any of the Rudra, Maharudra, or Atirudra sequences, sacrifice Udumbara sticks or honey-mixed unbroken rice in the mentioned number; wealth will be produced.

[For rain]:
Shaunaka says: With "Asau yastamrah", living on water, vegetables, and barley, sacrifice 10,000 Vetasa sticks, or 10,000 sticks smeared with goat's milk; the Lord Sun will send rain.

[For long life]:
He says: One desiring long life, having worshipped the Lord according to the rules, and having offered red, yellow, and black sacrifices in all directions—chant the Rudra-Ekadashini eleven times, perform the sixteen-fold worship with "Arat te goghna", and chant the same mantra 1,000 times. If sick, give Dakshina to a Brahmin on the altar-day and have him chant 1,000 times; he will be freed from diseases and live for 100 years.

[For a son]:
Shaunaka says: With "Pari no rudrasya", sacrifice 10,000 Banyan sticks; a long-lived son will be born.
[For cattle]:
With "Namo vah kirikebhyah", sacrifice 10,000 Vakankata and Udumbara sticks smeared with curd; he becomes the owner of infinite cattle. || 1 ||
