130 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. Pa. A.]

(Peace ritual continued): Similarly, at the end of the chant, chant each of the eleven Anuvakas beginning with "Agnavishnu sajoshasa". Bathe again with Panchamrita, worship the Lord, offer food and eatables, and worship four full pots (kalasha) containing five types of mud, five types of leaves, and five gems, using unbroken rice, scent, incense, etc. Wrap them in white cloth and, thinking of peace, chant "Sham no vatah pavatam" and perform the Abhisheka; peace results. Then he becomes healthy. Give a pair of white clothes, a cow, and gold to the Acharya, and feed Brahmins; peace results.

Shaunaka again: With "Ma no mahantam", sacrifice 10,000 Ashvattha sticks. Every year during a journey, sacrifice 10,000. By this, there is peace for children, women, and the elderly. With "Namo bhavaya" and "Namo jyeshthaya", enchant ash and protect those afflicted by spirits (Kumaragraha etc.). Tie a knot in the hair at night; there will be no fear from spirits. With "Midhushtama shivatama", in case of great fear, fear of thieves, fire, or danger to life, chant mentally; he will return safely. With "Imam rudraya", sacrifice 100,000 golden sprouts; even one whose life is ebbing due to great fever will live long. With "Namaste rudra manyave" and the next three Riks, sacrifice 10,000 each of barley, wheat, Gavidhuka, and wild sesame smeared with curd, honey, and ghee; this pacifies the wind-disorders (Vayu) within eleven or twelve nights. With "Adhyavochadadhivakta", perform protection for all. For the sick, enchant mustard seeds seven times and throw them in the four directions; protection is done in the ten directions. Peace results for one going on a path. Through mustard seeds, he is liberated from Brahma-rakshasas, ghosts, spirits, etc. With the final Rik of "Ya te rudra shiva tanuh", enchant 1,000 times daily and tie eleven knots in a thread for children and pregnant women; they will flourish happily.

[Expelling demons]:
With "Sahasrani...", wearing red clothes and red turban, and anointing with red paste, worship the Lord. In a cemetery, on a river bank, at a crossroads, or in a forest—having made an image of the enemy or demon out of barley flour enchanted eleven times, wrapped in cotton and rice and smeared with oil—place it in the cemetery fire. Anoint the chest of the image with bitter oil, establish it, and pierce the eleven vital spots with eleven arrows in the southern direction. This expels the enemy from the neighborhood or the entire world. With "Namo rudrebhyah", sacrifice in a thornless fire at midday; spirits, demons, and pishachas will fall away from the nation, and sky-roaming sorceresses or yakshas will be turned to ash.

[More pacification rituals]:
With "Imam rudraya", in case of disease among cows, light a fire in the middle of the cowshed and sacrifice 10,000 Vakankata sticks; cows will be saved. For all quadrupeds, perform the same ritual. || 1 ||
