( 6 )

...thus it is. From this, it is inferred that this Suta Samhita commentary was composed by some scholar named Madhava who was a resident of Kashi and a devotee of the feet of Tryambaka. Moreover, in the works of Madhavacharya:

"I bow to Gajanana, whom the lords of speech and other gods worship at the beginning of all undertakings to achieve success." (1)

This verse, like a royal seal, is found almost everywhere in the works composed by him. In the Suta Samhita commentary, it is not seen anywhere. Similarly, the author of the Madhava-nidana (a medical work) is also someone else. The Madhava who composed the Shata-prashna-kalpa-latika appears to be someone quite recent.

Now for the second commentary, by Bhatta Bhaskara. Regarding the question of who this Bhatta Bhaskara was and where he was from, nothing is known of his history. He composed a commentary on the entire Yajurveda. From the work named Shankara-vijaya composed by Madhavacharya, it is known that during the time of the venerable Bhagavan Shankaracharya, there was a scholar named Bhatta Bhaskara. From the Shankara-vijaya composed by the illustrious Anandagiri, it is understood that at that same time, there was another Bhatta Bhaskara who was a promoter of the science of Jyotisha (astronomy/astrology). We find no evidence to accept that this (commentator) is one of those two. Furthermore, if he were so ancient as to be contemporary with Shankaracharya, there is no mention of his Yajurveda commentary anywhere in the Vedartha-prakasha and other works composed by the illustrious Madhavacharya. In the Vedartha-prakasha, it is mentioned that there was a great scholar, a leader among Mimamsakas, named Bhattaguru. Scholars believe that he is indeed Bhatta Kumarila. Nevertheless, we are unable to determine where or when Bhatta Bhaskara, the author of the Yajurveda commentary, was born. Still, let the learned know for certain that this Bhatta Bhaskara is earlier than Madhavacharya. Thus, it is requested that this Rudradhyaya, combined with the two commentaries by Sayanacharya and Bhatta Bhaskara, may bring joy to the learned and be victorious everywhere.

Desirous of serving your honors,
Vamanashastri Sharma.
