[Na. Dvi. Am.] Rudradhyaya. 27

...establishes his lordship over material objects. Salutation to the golden-armed (hiranyabahave)—to him whose arms are decorated with gold. Or, to him whose arms possess bracelets etc. made of gold. [Grammatical explanation of the compound]. The mention of 'arms' is indicative (upalakshana). Either because all parts of his body are decorated with various ornaments, or because his arms are like gold. It means his entire body is like gold. For it is heard: "He is all golden up to his fingernails."
And it is remembered:
"One should know the Supreme Person as having the luster of gold, perceivable by a mind in the state of dream (meditation)."
Or: 'Hiranya' means that which is beneficial (hitam) and pleasing (ramaniyam). Or, pleasing to the heart. Salutation be to the one with such arms—this is the understood remainder.
'Senanyah'—assemblies (senah). Such as conscious assemblies of enjoyers: gods, humans, ancestors, asuras, rakshasas, pishachas, yakshas, kinnaras, vidyadharas, etc.; and the unconscious assembly of objects of enjoyment and the means of liberation and bondage, from Prakriti to the Earth. He is their leader (netre), controlling them as their Lord according to their respective roles. [Grammatical note on the accent of the word 'senanye']. This is either an adjective for the former or the substantive itself.
'Dishampataye namah'—salutation to the Lord of the directions, the East etc., in the form of the world-protectors (Lokapalas). Or, the Sun is the father of the directions, because he is their producer. For example: where the Sun rises is the East. Where he is seen moving is the South. Where he sets is the West. Where he is seen moving (on the other side) is the North. And they say:
"Meru is to the North of everyone, and Lokaloka is to the South."
Furthermore: "That Golden Person who is seen within the Sun." After the praise of the God, there is the praise of the Sun, which is the seat of his worship. Or: 'Dishah' refers to the arrangements/orders regarding substances, qualities, actions, etc.; Dharma, Adharma, etc.; and directions, place, time, etc. Salutation to the Lord, the promoter of those, the golden-armed controller of armies. [Grammatical note on the word 'disham']. (1)

He speaks the second Yajus:
Salutation to the trees with green leaves, salutation to the lord of cattle. (2)
...
