[Na. Ma. Am.] Rudradhyaya. 19

[Word-for-word]: Namah | astu | nila-grivaya | iti | nila-grivaya | sahasra-akshaya | iti | sahasra-akshaya | midhushe || atho | iti | ye | asya | satvanah | aham | tebhyah | akaram | namah || 9 ||

Sayana's Commentary: He who was called blue-throated (nilagriva) in the manner described before, he indeed becomes thousand-eyed (sahasraksha) by taking the form of Indra. Again, by taking the form of Parjanya (the rain-god), he is the pourer (midhusha), the shedder of rain. The meaning is he is the performer of the sacrifice. Salutation be to such a Rudra. And also (atho), to whichever beings are the attendants (satvanah) of this Rudra in the form of servants—to all of them I make (akaram) salutation, I bow down. (9)

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: For 'Namo astu nilagrivaya', the metre is Anushtup. The Rishi is Bhagavan Shambhu. The Deity is also Shambhu. Salutation be to the blue-throated (nilagriva), the blue-necked one. To the thousand-eyed (sahasraksha), the many-eyed one in the form of Indra. To the bountiful (midhushe)—to the shedder (of rain) through the sacrifice, or to the source of the world. Or, to the pourer of desired boons in the form of a man, by the placing of embryos. From the root 'mih' (to shed/pour). And also (atho), those who are the attendants (satvanah) of this God, his own great primary attendants (Ganas)—to them also I have made (akaram) salutation. The past tense is used in the Veda. 'Satvanah' means those who are inclined to stay (sadanashilah) near the God.

Now for the Purashcharana of this (mantra): having eaten sacrificial food (havishya) and chanting continuously for fifteen days, one completes it. Near a Shiva temple with a West-facing door, having made a fire-altar of one cubit in all directions, starting from the new moon day for ten days, and having offered a thousand Arka flowers daily, one should offer ghee and milk-porridge (payasa) to the God. Success in all matters will ensue. By this, the ritual for those desiring sons will be described. Having been initiated for five days, one should take it up in a temple of Shambhu, on a riverbank, or in a cowshed. In the temple, having invoked the God in a pot (kumbha) placed above the God or elsewhere, and having established fire to the west of it, one should offer eleven thousand Sami sticks and Sami leaves smeared with curd, honey, and ghee daily for three or five days of initiation. Daily eight thousand, or half of that, or eight hundred. One should place lotus (tamarasa) flowers on top, or leaves in their absence. Having done this, on the final day, one should feed eight thousand, or half of that, or eight hundred Brahmins. One should especially give away wealth. Having fed eleven Brahmins in the form of the eleven Rudras, and having given them some item, then to the south, in the presence of the God, having fed the Acharya more (than others), one should give him Dakshina. The Dakshina is land with seeds sown in it. The measure is also mentioned...
...
