[Na. Da. A.] Rudradhyaya | 89

Because it is the medicine for absolute cessation of misery. If only the first kind is accepted, the Lord makes us happy by granting worldly pleasures like wealth, sons, and heaven. If only the second is accepted, the Lord grants the highest good (liberation). Therefore, desiring both kinds of happiness, he says: "Shiva vishvaha-bheshaji". 'Vishvaha' means all days. It is the medicine that never loses its medicinal nature on any day. Other medicines might work only at certain times, places, or for certain body types. This body, being auspicious by nature, is called 'Shiva'. Furthermore: "Shiva rudrasya bheshaji". The word 'Rudra' here is based on action: one who destroys ('dravayati') the disease ('rujam') called Samsara. This body is the medicine for that. By that body, you heal those afflicted by the disease of Samsara. By that form which is auspicious, you are called 'Shiva'. By that body endowed with both types of auspiciousness, make us happy ('mrid'). 'Jivase' means to live; so that we may live healthily, with satisfaction and the gain of self-realization. Or, for the purpose of making us live; for all are to be made to live by You, sustained by the granting of desires. || 2 ||

[Purashcharana for this Mantra]: Having performed 108 Pranayamas, one should chant the mantra 5,000 times to complete the Purashcharana. This is specifically for protecting the fetus (garbha-raksha); nothing else. When the pregnancy is evident in the third month, perform the protection. A Brahmin who has mastered the Rudra-mantra should be worshipped as Shambhu, adorned according to one's wealth. During a healthy pregnancy, unhealthy things should not be consumed. Whenever there is a desire, it should be done. In a secluded place in the king's palace, take two fire-vessels, decorate with flags etc., and sprinkle pure rice while chanting the two mantras. Having made a fire-pit and an altar (vedika) there, on the altar, place a common pot and invoke Shambhu with golden flowers using the Mahasena mantra. In those two fire-vessels, place pots containing gold, wrapped in thread, covered with lids, filled with river water, and covered with cloth. In the center, place one pot filled with water, containing gold (if it's an even-numbered day) or nine gems (otherwise). Place three pots of water, cover them with expensive clothes, make them stable, and worship the Lord with sandalwood paste, Shrikhanda, lotuses, and a lamp with camphor-mixed ghee. Having worshipped thus, chant the 'Upasthana' mantra nearby. Then perform Homa with the 'Pata-samskara' mantra. Homa materials: sesame, durva grass, fried grains (laja), tulsi, and 'ucchira', mixed with ghee. || 12 ||
