( 5 )

In his later years, Madhavacharya gave up the burden of worldly empire to take up the burden of the spiritual empire and accepted the fourth stage of life (Sannyasa). In this stage, his famous name was Vidyaranya Tirtha. In the fourth stage, it is known that he accepted the headship of the Sharada Peetham at Sringeri, established by the illustrious Bhagavan Shankaracharya. It is known that he was the twenty-fourth in succession of Sannyasis from Shankaracharya on that seat, named Vidyaranya Bharati. His guru in the fourth stage was Shankarananda Swamin. This is clear from the mention of Shankarananda as his guru in his work Panchadashi: "Salutations to the lotus-born feet of the Guru, Sri Shankarananda." After accepting Sannyasa, he had many debates on the subjects of Dvaita and Advaita with scholars belonging to other schools. It is heard that there was a long debate in the city of Kanchi with a great scholar named Akshobhya Muni, a proponent of the Vishishtadvaita school. There was great conflict regarding victory and defeat among the followers of both schools. Some Vishishtadvaitins say:

"Akshobhya Muni cut down the great forest (Aranya) of Vidyaranya."

Others, the Advaitins, chatter as they please:

"The great-minded Vidyaranya agitated (kshobhayamaasa) the unagitated (Akshobhya)."

Let it be; enough of analyzing the babble of those gripped by partiality for their own views. The works composed by the illustrious Madhavacharya are these:

1. Rigveda Bhashya, 2. Yajurveda Bhashya, 3. Samaveda Bhashya, 4. Atharvaveda Bhashya, 5. Commentaries on the Brahmanas of the four Vedas like Aitareya, Tandya, etc., 6. Parashara Smriti Bhashya, 7. Jaiminiya Nyayamala Vistara, 8. Sarvadarshana Sangraha, 9. Anubhuti Prakasha, 10. Dashopanishad Deepika, 11. Brahma Gita, 12. Panchadashi, 13. Jivanmukti Viveka, 14. Aparokshanubhuti Tika, 15. Madhava Vritti.

Many other such works composed by him are found. The commentator on the Suta Samhita within the Skanda Purana is also famous as Madhava. Some say he is the same Sayana-Madhava. In the manuscript of the Suta Samhita commentary collected by us:

"I bow to the Supreme Brahman, from whom functions have turned away; whom thoughts make their object, though it is a reality that cannot bear (is beyond) reasoning. (1)
By the illustrious minister Madhava, a devotee of the Lord of Power known as Kashi-vilasa, whose mind is expert in serving the lotus feet of the illustrious Tryambaka (Shiva)... (2)
The establisher of the Vedic scriptures, the illustrious minister Madhava, composes the 'Tatparya-deepika' (Lamp of Meaning) on the Suta Samhita. (3)
This work is made after churning the essential meaning of that section, explaining difficult words and sentences for the grace of the slow-witted and out of devotion." (4)
...
