[Na. Pu. A.] Rudradhyaya | 117

Those Rudras who are on the earth—among them, those whose arrows (ishavah) are food itself. Meaning, those who strike by making people eat forbidden food, or by making them steal for food, or by causing diseases through food. Salutations to those earth-dwelling Rudras with food-arrows. Similarly, those in the atmosphere whose arrows are the wind (vatah), who strike by causing diseases through fierce winds. Similarly, those in the heaven whose arrows are the rain (varsham), who strike by causing excessive rain or drought. Salutations to them. What kind of salutations? "Ten to the East...": While making the anjali (joined palms) facing East, the ten fingers are pointed East. Similarly for South etc. and Upward. By such special salutations, let there be salutation to those Rudras. May those Rudras make us happy (mridayantu). We, having saluted the Rudras—him whom we hate (even if he is quiet) and who hates us (even if we are quiet)—that twofold enemy, O Rudras, I place (dadhami) in your wide-open jaws (jambhe). || 11 ||

Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya: This is a Yajus mantra. Rishi is Bhagavan Himself. Chhandas is Anushtubh. Rudra is the deity. By this mantra, having saluted the Rudras in the three worlds, he prays for his own happiness and the downfall of his haters. The common parts of the three Yajus are "Namo rudrebhyah" and "tebhyo dasha...". The specific parts are (1) earth/food-arrows, (2) atmosphere/wind-arrows, (3) heaven/rain-arrows.

"Namo rudrebhyo...": To those on the earth whose arrows/means of destruction is food. They strike some by causing diseases through food, some by hunger, some by leading them to death for the sake of food. Salutations to them. The salutation is qualified: "Ten to the East..." (Anjali with ten fingers in each direction). May they make us happy. Him whom we hate and who hates us—I place him in your jaws (jambhe) or teeth. The singular is for the class (teeth). I place him there so that you may consume him. || 11 ||
