[Na. Pra. Am.] Rudradhyaya. 13

...all of them, like serpents, tigers, etc. And all the 'yatudhanis'—destroying (jambhayan) even all the races of Rakshasas (demons). (6)

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: For 'Adhyavochadadhivakta', the metre is Anushtup. Some say Nichrit. The Rishi is Kanva. The Deity is Shambhu. These four mantras starting from here are in the third person (parokshakrita). 'Adhyavochat'—let him speak for (us). The past tense is used in the sense of the imperative in the Veda. 'Adhivachanam' means a speech that is superior or elevated. It means speaking with partiality (favor). As in "one should speak for a Brahmin." Or, it means speaking with lordship or superiority; may he speak for us devotees. 'Adhivakta' means one whose nature is to speak for others; or one who is always capable of speaking for his devotees. Those who are not lords, if they speak for others, become objects of laughter. He states the reason for his being an advocate: 'Prathamah'—the foremost, the chief. 'Daivyah'—existing among the gods. Or, 'devana' (from which 'deva' is derived) means play, desire for conquest, business, light, praise, or movement. He is the form of joy in play; the form of victory in the desire for conquest; the form of clarity in business; the form of light in illumination; the form of the object of praise in hymns; and the form of the destination or the form of wind in movement. Or, the gods are those endowed with divine knowledge; he is the foremost among them. 'Bhishak'—physician. He is the healer of afflictions (vyasana) like disease, heat, and worldly existence. There is another mantra: "I hear you are the physician of physicians." 'Bhishak' can also mean he who makes fear perish, or he who is reached by the mind in the midst of fear, because he is the ground of fearlessness. Or, he who graces through the breaking of the body (of ego). Doing what should he speak for us? He says here: 'Ahimmshcha sarvan jambhayan'—by means of destroying. 'Jambhanam' means destruction. 'Ahayah' are those who come and harm beings; those whose nature is to strike, the direct killers of subjects like tigers, serpents, scorpions, etc.—destroying all of them. The word 'cha' (and) should be seen after 'all', meaning 'destroying all of them indeed'. And all the 'yatudhanis'—destroying all the races of Yatudhanas (sorcerers/demons). 'Yatus' are the sorrows or the illusions that cause pain; 'Yatudhanas' are those in whom these reside. This is what is said: may he speak for us while destroying all those who wish to strike, like scorpions, tigers, thieves, etc., and those who are not peaceful.
...
