( 3 )

In that region, on the banks of the Tungabhadra river, there is a lake and a sacred field named Pampa. In former times, its name was famous as Vijayanagara. Some call this same city Vidyanagari. At present, it is famous as Golconda (though the text likely refers to the ruins near Hampi/Vijayanagara, as it mentions Virupaksha). There, Lord Shankara, in the form of Virupaksha, purifies the people of that place by his sight. There lived a sovereign king named Virabukka, a promoter of the Vedic path, who had dried up the ocean of his enemies by his prowess. Just as Brihaspati was to Indra, Sumati to Nala, Vashistha to Rama, Dhaumya to the son of Dharma (Yudhisthira), and Saujamini to Prithu, so was this Madhavacharya his family preceptor (Kulaguru), great minister, and the bearer of the burden of state affairs. He, whose wealth of policy surpassed that of Brihaspati, Shukra, and Chanakya, held great prestige in the scriptures and in worldly affairs. Therefore, meaningful names like Madhavabhatta, Madhavacharya, and Madhavamatyah are found for him in various works+. Regarding him—

+ This (inscription) from a copper plate should be considered here:
In this land of Bharatavarsha, in the southern part, there is the Karnataka country; in its midst flows the excellent river named Tungabhadra. On its bank resides Virupaksha, the fire to the forest of sins, constantly worshipped by the assembly of gods... (1)
Near it shines the capital city named Vijaya (Vijayanagara), hard to be conquered by enemies. In that city, lotus-eyed women bring back to life Cupid (Smara), who was burnt by the glance of Virupaksha... (2)
In the Yadu lineage, like a new part of Achyuta (Vishnu), was born King Bukka from Sri Sangama, a hero like Bhima in battle. By the speed of his commands, he ruled the middle world... (3)
By his command, the excellent minister Madhava ruled the prosperous kingdom of Chandragiri. By the power of his counsel, even enemies who give up their bodies (die), alas, attain peace! (4)

That minister, whose fame rested at the ends of the quarters, desiring to conquer the directions with a great army, surrounded the capital of Konkan named Goa with another ocean, as I think... (5)
Having uprooted the Turks (Taurushkas) established there, that sole hero of the world, by his arm, established the uprooted images of deities like Saptanatha... (6) etc.

Hail! In the Shaka year one thousand three hundred and thirteen (1313) [1391 AD], in the current Prajapati year, in the month of Vaishakha, in the dark fortnight, on the day of the new moon (Amavasya), a Wednesday, at the holy time of a solar eclipse, the illustrious great minister and teacher who promoted the path of the Upanishads, Sri Madhavaraja, having made the village named Kunjara in the Kunjara district into an Agrahara (land grant to Brahmins) with the famous name Madhavapuri... enough of this expansion.
