[Na. Pa. A.] Rudradhyaya | 129

(Cattle ritual continued): And his cows will not perish. Or, with the same (sixth mantra of 11th Anuvaka), sacrifice 100 offerings of ghee and 11 offerings of cow-milk; eleven cows will be obtained.

[For power of speech]:
Shaunaka says: Establish a Linga with anthill-clay at a great crossroads and bathe it with Panchagavya. Enchanting it with "Namo vah kirikebhyah", offer ghee-Payasam for two days with the mantra "Ma nastoke". In front of Dakshinamurti, take the powder of Vacha fruit and nutmeg, place it in a copper vessel, mix with cow-ghee, enchant it with 10,000 repetitions using the index finger, and consume it; his words will never be refuted.

Again: With "Drape andhasaspate" etc., sacrifice 100,000 times; his clothes will become imperishable.
[For control (vashya)]:
Bodhayana says: Chanting any of the Rudra sequences, sacrifice flowers; he brings the whole world under control. If he desires to make the whole world follow his will, he should stand in navel-deep water and chant the Rudras. Having worshipped Shambhu and taken a vow, facing the Sun, he should always repeat the Rudras. For the wise one who repeats the Rudras thus, controlling the senses, Shiva (the Bull-flagged one) appears as the bestower of boons, being fond of devotees.

[For health]:
Shaunaka says: With "Ma no mahantam", sacrifice 10,000 sesame seeds; children and servants will have health. In case of impending death or all fears, one desiring immediate liberation—having performed nyasa as before and worshipping with "Midhushtama" and sixteen-fold rituals, chant the Rudra-Ekadashini eleven times or have a knower of Rudra chant it; he is freed from all fears without doubt. With "Imam rudraya", sacrifice 10,000 each of curd, honey, and Payasam; all fears will be pacified.

[For peace]:
One desiring peace, having performed nyasa as before and worshipped the Lord, choose a Rudra-knowing Brahmin as Acharya. Approach a Svayambhu Linga and worship it there also with the same procedure. Bathe with five nectars (Panchamrita), perform Homa with ghee using the first Anuvaka, worship the Lord, and chant the eleven Anuvakas beginning with "Namaste rudra manyave". || 17 ||
