10  Sayanacharya—Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya-Sahita— [Na. Pra. Am.]

...meaning the suffix 'matup' expresses possession. He who resides with manifest happiness in places like Kailasa is 'Girishanta'.

Now for the Purashcharana of this mantra: having eaten sacrificial food (havishya) and chanting for three nights, one completes the Purashcharana. Now, with this, one should perform 'Go-shanti' (peace for cattle). Having made a fire-altar of one cubit in all directions in the middle of a cowshed, and having churned the fire, one should offer ten thousand sticks of Vaikangata and Apamarga wood, smeared with curd, honey, and ghee. Now, we will describe another peace-rite for cattle with this same mantra. Having consecrated pot-water with all perfumes by the Brahmins, and having chanted it a hundred thousand times, one should sprinkle the cows. Peace for the cows will ensue.

Meditation (Dhyanam):
"One should meditate on the Lord of Beings (Pashupati), the Controller, who has a smiling face, who is adorned with the crescent moon, who holds the Ganga, who is accompanied by the Daughter of the Mountain (Parvati), who has three eyes, and who is adorned with ashes and serpents." (3)

|| He speaks the fourth verse ||

That arrow, O dweller on the mountain, which you hold in your hand to throw;
Make that auspicious, O protector of the mountain; do not harm our people or our moving world. (4)

[Word-for-word]: Yam | ishum | giri-shanta | haste | bibharshi | astave || shivam | giri-tra | tam | kuru | ma | himsiih | purusham | jagat || 4 ||

Sayana's Commentary: O Girishanta, that arrow (ishu) which you hold in your hand to throw (astave) at enemies. "Giritra" means he who protects or guards (trayate) the mountain (giri) named Kailasa. O Rudra, make that arrow held in your hand auspicious (shiva), peaceful towards us. Do not harm our human people (purusham) or our 'jagat'—moving beings other than humans, like cattle etc. (4)

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: For the two mantras 'Yamishum girishanta' and 'Shivenavachasa', the Rishi is Gautama. Some say Godhuma. The Deity is Rudra. 'Yamishum' is in Nichrit-Anushtup metre. 'Shivenavachasa' is in Anushtup. By these two, the fierce body engaged in the burning of Tripura is pacified. O Girishanta—explained already. That arrow which you hold (bibharshi) in your hand. For what purpose? To throw (astave) at the demons who are to be killed, after the request of the gods. As the gods said: "Who will throw this (arrow)?... Rudra is indeed cruel, let him throw it." He said "Let a boon (be given) to me." Or, after the burning of the straw of Tripura, that arrow which you hold in your hand to withdraw, having fulfilled its purpose as instructed—make that arrow auspicious (shiva), welfare-causing. Just as it targets only those to be killed, it should be understood as protecting your devotees. 'Ma himsiih'—do not harm me...
...
