90 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. Da. A.]

Then the Havis (offering) worship. Havis is rice cooked from half-a-prastha of grains; sacrifice it in the fire. Sacrifice with that mantra, then give scented sandalwood mixed with camphor. Either the Acharya or another expert consumes it, as it belongs to the Guru. Thus, in the evening, the Acharya should touch the pair (pots/fire) and chant. The ritual involves the usual Brahmin-assembly and offering of clothes. Thus, the two fire-vessels are worshipped. Feed as many Brahmins. This method is within the power of a king. By doing this, a virtuous and long-lived child is born. There will be no miscarriage. Apart from the scents mentioned, others are according to instruction. Eunuchs and Shudras should not enter the Homa area. Nor should non-believers, because the mantra is Vedic. On the final day, the bath. Give the ritual items as a gift to the Guru. Then perform Gana-puja for the protection from planetary spirits (Kumaragraha). The child will be long-lived. In this context, some other things are stated:

"One desiring a daughter obtains a daughter by sacrificing fried grains (laja) with ghee. A wise man should destroy poverty (Alakshmi) by Homa with Apamarga sticks. To destroy all sins, sacrifice sesame offerings. To control Brahmins etc., sacrifice Khadira sticks. By sacrificing 100,000 offerings of ghee with white, red, blue, and yellow threads respectively, the seeker attains all desires. One desiring control (vashya) should sacrifice with flowers like lilies. The face will attain the color of the flower sacrificed. One desiring rain should clean a pure spot with cow-dung and draw a mandala with a red substance. In front of the mandala, place a new pot, well-wrapped with thread and filled with scented water. Then invoke Surya (the Sun) in the pot with a focused mind. The best seeker should worship the Lord there as before. A wise man should sacrifice milk there 168 times. With a focused mind, meditating on Surya, he should chant the mantra 1,000 times. Do this for a week or twelve days. Then the pleased Lord sends a great rain. One desiring a son, being of pure conduct, should fast for a day and night and sacrifice 108 offerings of Payasam. A wise man, chanting the mantra 600 times, should feed the remains of the sacrifice to his wife who has taken the ritual bath after her period and is adorned in clean clothes."
