63  Sayanacharya—Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya-Sahita— [Na. Sa. Am.]

...likewise, the stopping (stambha) of the enemy army is told: one should offer a hundred thousand (lakh) Arka sticks to the Sun for each salutation, saying "I perform the stopping of the enemy army, Svaha." When this is done, the enemy army is stopped (paralyzed). With these two (anuvakas), one should consecrate all the King's food items; they become free from harm. One desiring the withering (shoshana) of the enemy army should do as follows: offer a hundred thousand (lakh) meats each of a golden boar, rabbit, shaka (?), partridge (pinjala), sparrow (kalavinka), and deer into a fire brought by a Shudra. Also offer a lakh of cakes (apupa) as oblations. For each salutation, say "I perform the withering of the enemy nation's subjects, Svaha." When this is done, the enemy nation's subjects wither. Their Dakshinas are gold, silver, cows, land, clothes, etc.; thus it is said for kings. Now for others: for childless women (vandhyas), one should offer twenty-one thousand Udumbara wood-sticks soaked in curd, honey, and ghee into her own fire for each salutation. Perform an abhisheka (sprinkling) for each salutation with water-filled pots whose number is equal to the salutations, wrapped in threads and covered with new cloth. Chant eight thousand times with these two and sprinkle Mahadeva; chant these two for only seven 'nadikas'; perform eight thousand circumambulations. Consecrate a ball of flour (pishti-pinda) with these two and have her eat it. With these two, chant eleven times for each salutation with Sami leaves in the current of a river. By these rituals, a son equal to Rudra is born to the faithful. Even to a man and woman of thirty-eight and forty-eight years respectively, a son is born whose eyes are as prescribed (?). He who is born as a devotee of Shiva (Shankara) himself has a trident-mark (shula-anka) on his hands. Having cooked ghee-milk-porridge with these two, one should offer eight thousand oblations; then in another birth he is born as a Brahmin. Consecrate a thread with these two and tie it on the hand of a pregnant woman; then miscarriage will not occur. With these two, perform the protection of those possessed by 'Kumara-grahas' with ashes and incense, and tie a stone (shila) at night. There will be no fear of Kumara-grahas.

Meditation (Dhyanam):
"One should remember the one with a body of both man and woman (Ardhanarishwara), mounted on a chariot, holding an arrow in his hand, and having the bow made of the Golden Mountain (Meru) placed in the lotus hand of Gauri."

|| Thus in the Yajurveda commentary composed by Sri Bhatta Bhaskara, in the Sri Rudra-prashna, ends the Sixth Anuvaka. ||
|| This Sixth Anuvaka is completed. ||

Sayana's Commentary: In the sixth anuvaka, those Yajus with salutation at one end were spoken. Now, other such Yajus are being stated in the seventh.

Bhatta-Bhaskara-Bhashya: Having established the God's universal lordship, he speaks while announcing (ghoshana) that very thing. In the seventh anuvaka, he speaks sixteen Yajus.

Salutation to the one in the drum and to the one in the drum-stick. (1)

[Word-for-word]: Namah | dundubhyaya | cha | a-hananyaya | cha || 1 ||
...
