108 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. Da. A.]

Thousands and thousands of ways are your weapons in your arms. O Bountiful one! O Lord of these! Turn their faces away from us. || 12 ||

Sayanacharya Bhashya: O Rudra, in Your arms (bahuvo), Your weapons (hetayah) are 'sahasradha'—of a thousand kinds—and 'sahasrani'—numbering in the thousands. There is a thousand-fold variety by class like bows, swords, tridents, etc. And in each class, there are many thousands. O 'Bhagavah' (endowed with six opulences), You are 'Ishana' (the capable Lord); make the faces (mukha)—the sharp tips—of those weapons turn away (parachina) from us. || 12 ||

Thus ends the Tenth Anuvaka in the Shri Rudra Bhashya of the Yajur-Samhita, Fourth Kanda, Fifth Prapathaka, in the Madhaviya Vedartha Prakasha composed by Sayanacharya. || 10 ||

Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya: The Rishi of "Sahasrani sahasradha" is Narada or Kanva. Chhandas is Anushtubh. Rudra is the deity. The application (viniyoga) is for the pacification of royal disturbances.

Commentary: Your weapons (hetayah) situated in Your arms are of thousands of kinds and in thousands of numbers. The dual 'arms' is for the form. Or even among many armed forms, only two arms are active in striking. (Grammatical notes). Each weapon is shown as thousands in number. O Bountiful one, make the tips of those weapons turn away from us; let them not be facing us. Or make the initiatives (upakrama) of those destructions not facing us. You are 'Ishana', the Lord of all. You are capable of employing or withdrawing those weapons at Your will; therefore, turn their faces away. (Grammatical notes). || 12 ||

[Purashcharana for this Mantra]: Having performed half a Kricchra penance, one should chant the mantra 15,000 times to complete the Purashcharana. With this mantra, one should perform the pacification of royal disturbances for people. Sacrifice 10,000 offerings of Shalmali and Vakankata sticks, with rice, barley, and sesame seeds smeared with ghee; disturbances will perish. Chant 100,000 times in front of Dakshinamurti. For the destruction of a great enemy, make a form out of anthill-clay and perform Abhisheka over its head until it is destroyed. ||
