118 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. Pa. A.]

(Bhatta Bhaskara continued): 'Jambhah' are the side teeth. (Grammatical notes on 'prachi' etc.). Some add the word 'kurmah' (we do): "We make the ten fingers towards the East...". Others say: First "Namo rudrebhyah" is vocal salutation, "tebhyo dasha..." is physical, and "tebhyo namah" at the end is mental. Having done thus, he prays for his desires.

The second Yajus: "ye antarikshe...": For those in the atmosphere whose arrows are the wind. Meaning, those who strike through variations/excess of wind, or through the five breaths. The rest is the same.

The third Yajus: "ye divi...": For those in the heaven whose arrows are the rain. Meaning, those who strike through excessive rain or drought. The rest is the same. || 11 ||

[Purashcharana for this Mantra]: Having taken a vow for 21 days, for every 5 days do not eat anything other than water. (1) Milk for 5 days, (2) fruits for 5 days, (3) curd for 5 days, (4) fruits for 5 days. Then one day fast. Thus living for 21 days on Havisya, chant continuously. Then for 5 days, stand in neck-deep water. One day, chant according to the 'Prasarpana' method. Give 10 gold nishkas to the Acharya and serve him. This completes the Purashcharana. Then daily sacrifice 8,000 or 108 offerings of ghee. Chant with a focused mind throughout life. The rituals to be performed: On a New Moon day, sacrifice 8,000 offerings of cow-ghee in the kindled fire. Then, having cut some hair, sacrifice 108 times. Worship according to the Atharvashiras method. Then a 'Kritya' (a magical entity) with red body, red hair, and red eyes will appear. Having already placed four pots filled with goat's blood, satisfy her with them. Otherwise, she might destroy the performer. Through her, one can command anything and achieve all desires. Sacrifice 10,000 offerings of ghee; long life will result. Sacrifice 10,000 offerings of cow-milk; one will remember previous births (jati-smara). The fruits are stated: ||
