143 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Cha. Pra. A.]

(Seventh Anuvaka continued):
...the Patnivata cup, and the Hariyojana cup—may all these be mine through sacrifice. || 7 ||

Sayanacharya Bhashya: The specific Soma cups (grahas) like Amshu etc. are well-known in the Soma sacrifice section. Since the 'Rashmi' cup is not explicitly seen but is taken along with the 'Adabhya' cup, the 'Amshu' is mentioned separately and then the 'Rashmi' is mentioned to indicate that process. For the rays (rashmi) are the means of taking it. Thus the mantra for taking it is read: "By the bright, with the bright, I take thee, for the day, with the rays of the Sun." By the word 'Adhipati', the curd-cup (dadhi-graha) is intended. It has lordship (adhipatya) because of its excellence. Therefore it is heard: "This is indeed the eldest of the cups." By 'Pratiprasthana', the cup to be taken along with the two-deity cups (dvidevatyas) is intended. Since the Vaishvanara hymn is read during the process of pouring the 'Dhruva' cup, that stage is referred to by the word 'Vaishvanara'. The first 'Vaishvadeva' cup belongs to the morning pressing (pratah-savana). The second one belongs to the third pressing (tritiya-savana). The 'Sarasvata' cup should be seen in the context of the Abhishechaniya (coronation) ritual of the Rajasuya sacrifice; for it is heard there: "He takes the Sarasvata cup." Similarly, the 'Paushna' cup should be seen in modified rituals (vikriti).

Thus ends the Seventh Anuvaka in the Chamaka Bhashya of the Yajur-Samhita, Fourth Kanda, Fifth Prapathaka, in the Madhaviya Vedartha Prakasha composed by Sayanacharya. || 7 ||

He states the eighth Anuvaka:

May the fuel, the sacred grass, the altar, the fire-altars, the ladles, the cups, the pressing-stones, the wooden vessel (svaru), the sounding-holes (uparava), the pressing-boards, the Drona vessel, the Vayavya vessels, the Putabhrit vessel, the Adhavaniya vessel, the Agnidhra altar, the oblation-holder, the houses, the assembly hall, the Purodasha cakes, the cooked offerings, the final bath (avabhritha), and the invocation 'Svaga'—may all these be mine through sacrifice. || 8 ||
