[Na. Dvi. Am.] Rudradhyaya. 29

...from all sides (vishvatah)—meaning all including sons, grandsons, etc., in every way, let it avoid us. And also (atho), we pray for another thing. That quiver belonging to you, in which the terrifying arrows stay—place (nidhehi) it far (aare) from us. Or, place it in the assembly of enemies (are-samyuhe). Withdraw its direct aim from us.

Now for the Purashcharana of these verses (13, 14, 15), one should do the same as for the previous three. With these also, at the time of battle, having thrown oil (one droni and 11,000 or similar measures) into a trough, and having worshipped the Guardian of the Field (Kshetrapala) along with the Guardians of the World (Lokapalas) there, and having touched the oil, one should chant eight thousand times each day for seven days. With that perfected oil, having lit eleven thousand lamps, the commander of the army should go forward (towards the enemy) without the king. Seeing the flame of the lamps, the enemy army will not stand. By this power alone, the enemies perish. Furthermore, with these very (mantras), in the enemy's city, Brahmins who are capable and perfected in mantras, wearing the guise of perfected ones (siddhas), may perform malevolent rites (abhichara) against the enemy. Whatever object the (enemy) king uses, having touched it and seen it, and having heard from his mouth what is unfit to be touched or seen, they should chant that there is a curse (abhichara). At the end of the mantras, having placed another stake (shanku) in the city crossroads, temple, garden, or at the city gate, they should bury it after a thousand consecrations. That city, due to the anger of Shambhu, suffers from disease for three years. For the Acharya who has this done, wealth equal to a kingdom should be given. In all cases, success comes from the power of the mantra. It should be done with a mind full of faith.

Meditation (Dhyanam):
"I constantly remember the Father of the worlds, who has the Pinaka in his hand, accompanied by the Goddess (Parvati), whose pair of lotus feet is reddened by the dust of the flowers from the garlands on the heads of the bowing assembly of gods." (15)

|| Thus in the Yajurveda commentary composed by Sri Bhatta Bhaskara, in the Rudra-prashna, ends the First Anuvaka. ||
|| This First Anuvaka is completed. ||

Sayana's Commentary: In the first anuvaka, the primary body of the Lord Rudra, which holds the bow and arrows, was pacified in many ways. Now, in the next eight anuvakas, those play-forms (leela-vigraha) of his which are the causes of the world's functioning are pacified. In these anuvakas, all the mantras are Yajus (prose). They are of two types: those with salutations at both ends (ubhayato-namaskara) and those with salutation at only one end. In three anuvakas (2nd, 3rd, 4th), each Yajus starts with 'Namah' and ends with 'Namah'. In the other five, each Yajus only starts with 'Namah'. In the second anuvaka, there are thirteen Yajus mantras.

There, he speaks the first Yajus:
Salutation to the golden-armed commander of armies, and salutation to the lord of the directions. (1)
...
