[Na. Pa. A.] Rudradhyaya | 129

(Sayanacharya Bhashya continued): The animal that steps first on the thrown leaf, before the other animals, will die. || 11 ||

[Summary of Applications]:
In the Fifth Prashna, the Shatarudriya Homa is stated.
One mantra is declared up to "Sabha-patibhyah".
One up to "Avaryaya", and the next up to "Tanmasi".
In "Namo rudrebhyah", based on the division of earth etc.,
it is divided threefold; thus five mantras are mentioned for Homa here.

[Mimamsa (Philosophical Inquiry)]:
Discussed in the Eighth Pada of the Tenth Chapter (of Purva Mimamsa):
Regarding the mention of Jatila (wild sesame), is there a fourfold option, or is the Shruti regarding milk (aja-ksheera) the rule?
Is it an option as before? No, it is a single statement (ekavakyatva) along with milk.

In the Agni section it is heard:
"One should sacrifice with the porridge of wild sesame or wild wheat... thus he harms neither domestic nor wild animals. But they say, 'Wild sesame and wild wheat are not fit for sacrifice.' One should sacrifice with goat's milk. This goat is related to Agni..."

Sayanacharya Bhashya: Jatila is wild sesame. Gavidhuka is wild wheat. The option between them is indeed Vedic. The third view is the absence of Homa, since the first two views are criticized as "not fit for sacrifice" (anahuti). And here, "not fit for sacrifice" cannot be interpreted as a prohibition (paryudasa), because the negative particle 'nan' cannot be applied to Jatila/Gavidhuka when it is connected to the word 'ahuti'. The fourth view is the rule for milk. Between these four mutually contradictory views, since there is no other way, an option (vikalpa) like "taking or not taking the Shodashi cup" is reached. (The conclusion follows). But it is more appropriate to consider the mention of Jatila etc. as an 'arthavada' (praise/explanation) forming a single statement with the rule for milk. To show the merit of the ritual being free from harm to domestic or wild animals, even those two (Jatila/Gavidhuka) are mentioned, but they do not have the status of being a sacrifice. ||
