126 Sayanacharya—along with Bhatta Bhaskara Bhashya— [Na. E. A.]

(Sayanacharya continued): Only milk has the status of being an oblation. Thus milk is highly praised. Therefore, the rest is 'arthavada' (explanatory praise).

"Destroying the darkness of the heart with the light of the meaning of the Veda, may Vidyatirtha-Maheshwara grant the four goals of human life."

Thus ends the Eleventh Anuvaka in the Shri Rudra Bhashya of the Yajur-Samhita, Fourth Kanda, Fifth Prapathaka, in the Madhaviya Vedartha Prakasha composed by Sayanacharya.
|| Thus ends the Bhashya on the Shri Rudradhyaya ||

"One should meditate on Shiva, the Lord of gods riding a bull, the sole cause of all worlds, praised by Brahma and others, and accompanied by Parvati."

By mere chanting of this collection of Rudra mantras, all success is achieved. One who bathes at the three times and chants becomes purified from the five great sins.

[Ritual for all desires as stated by Shaunaka]:
Furthermore, having performed the placement of mantras (nyasa) as before, prepare pots of one-prastha measure filled with water, unbroken rice, scents, and flowers. Worship the Lord as before. Beside the Lord, offer oblations of ghee with the mantras of the first Anuvaka of Shri Rudram. Then chant the 'Rudra-Ekadashini'. At the end of the chant, chant each of the eleven Anuvakas beginning with "Agnavishnu...". Then perform Abhisheka (bath) with five myriad ('panchayutaih') offerings. Then with Panchagavya. Then the primary worship with "Namaste...". Then feed as many Brahmins who are knowers of the Rudra-mantras as possible. All desires are fulfilled. Alternatively, after chanting any of the Rudra, Maharudra, or Atirudra sequences, sacrifice Payasam in the mentioned number; one attains all desires. Alternatively, as per one's capacity, perform Abhisheka with milk and ghee. Enchanting with the Rudradhyaya, sacrifice 10,000 offerings of ghee and Payasam with the mantra "Ma nastoke...". This ritual is also used for removing diverse troubles, obstacles, etc. All works should be started with the sound 'Phat'. One desiring a kingdom should offer 100,000 blue lotuses smeared with both types of sandalwood over the head of Lord Maheshwara with the mantra "Manushya dhanavanah...". The king will attain prosperity. Sacrifice 100,000 sesame seeds and rice smeared with ghee with the mantra "Namo vah kirikebhyah..."; one attains a kingdom.

[Another method stated by Bodhayana]:
After chanting any of the Rudra, Maharudra, or Atirudra sequences, one desiring a nation should sacrifice 10,000 barley seeds smeared with ghee. For prosperity (Shri), after chanting any of those, sacrifice 10,000 offerings of Payasam; he attains prosperity. For wealth, sacrifice 100,000 sesame seeds with the mantra "Imam rudraya". Now, Sanatkumara in the Kashika Purana: ||
