26                        Śrī Rudra Bhāṣyam

[Continuing the account of Kṛṣṇa's Śrī Rudra recitation during the Kailāsa Yātrā (pilgrimage to Mount Kailāsa)]

...the statements in the Mahābhārata regarding Śrī Kṛṣṇa's recitation of Śrī Rudra during the Kailāsa pilgrimage, undertaken to propitiate the Pāśupatākṣa (the eye of Paśupati [Śiva]) dwelling at the Mānasa lake, are also to be cited as evidence.

Though the Lord Vāsudeva, who is the Supreme Brahman and who has obtained all desires, has nothing that need be prayed for or obtained from any source — nonetheless, in accordance with the Gītā's teaching: "Whatever a great person does, others follow; whatever standard he sets, the world abides by it" — his performance of these acts is perfectly intelligible as being for the purpose of loka-saṃgraha (guiding the world). Indeed, the Lord himself has declared in the Mahābhārata: "As I set the example, the world follows me. There is truly nothing that I need to obtain as a boon, O joy of the Pāṇḍavas. Yet having deliberated upon this in my mind, I formerly worshipped the Lord of the universe, who is my own Self, through my own self, for the sake of [teaching about] sons [and other goals]." And in the Kūrma Purāṇa: "They do not perceive that God, being deluded by my māyā (illusory power). Therefore, to instruct the ignorant about my own [true] form, I worship Him." Thus it is firmly established that the Lord Vāsudeva himself, who performed Śrī Rudra recitation for the instruction of the world, is our primary authority regarding the glory of that recitation. In this way, the supremacy of Śrī Rudra is confirmed by the Itihāsas (epics) as well.

Similarly, the Purāṇas also make known that supremacy. Passages from the Brahma-uttara-khaṇḍa, the Kūrma Purāṇa, and others have already been cited above. Many hundreds more can be found. Rather than citing all of them — which would require great elaboration — a few are offered here by way of the "rice in the pot" (sthālī-pulāka) principle [i.e., sampling the whole by tasting a part]:
