80                    Śrī Rudra Bhāṣyam

---

    "Salutation to the weapon (heti) of Bhava (Śiva the cause of existence); salutation to the Lord of the worlds (jagatāṃ pataye namaḥ)."

Thus through five mantras, the Lord has been saluted with demonstrations of his lordship over certain specific things such as the directions and so forth. Now, since it is impossible to salute him individually in respect of his sovereignty over each and every thing, the sixth mantra is employed to salute him as the "Lord of the worlds" (jagatpati): "Namo bhavasya iti" — Bhava means saṃsāra (the cycle of existence); the heti (weapon) which cuts it — meaning he is the one who severs the stream of worldly existence (saṃsāravṛtta). He is the lord (pati) of all the worlds (jagatāṃ), both moving and unmoving. To him may there be salutation. Although the lordship over the entire world, from Brahmā to the stationary, was already stated by [the mantra] "Paśūnāṃ pataye namaḥ" — [the difference is that] there, it was stated in the sense of his being the cause of the bondage of saṃsāra; here, the distinction is that he is the liberator from saṃsāra. Both aspects, however, are attributes of Brahman.

    "Salutation to Rudra (the one who dispels affliction), to the one who stretches the bow (ātatāvitane), to the lord of the fields (kṣetrāṇāṃ pataye namaḥ)."

Now, to further support what has already been said about his lordship over the world, and in order to salute the Blessed Lord again through [the demonstration of] his sovereignty over various particular things — in the manner of a persistent supplicant walking again and again — the commentary begins the seventh [mantra] and those following: "Namo Rudrāya iti" — Rudra is he who dispels (drāvaka) the suffering of saṃsāra; hence, because he protects (avati, i.e., rakṣati) with the stretched (ātatena) bow, he is Ātatāvitin. Kṣetrāṇi means bodies (śarīrāṇi), as the Smṛti says: "This body, O son of Kuntī, is called the kṣetra (the field)" — he who is the lord of these bodies is kṣetrāṇāṃ patiḥ, to him may there be salutation. Just as in ordinary life the inhabitants of a land are protected by the overlord of that land —
