---
Sri Rudra Bhashyam                    143
---

— who bestows fearlessness and boons upon the frightened, who is praised by hosts of gods." Mantra-siddhi (perfection in the mantra) is attained by three nights of continuous recitation preceded by a one-night fast. This mantra is primarily for the destruction of enemies (śatru-nāśana).

    pari ṇo rudrasya hetir vṛṇaktu pari tveṣasya
    durmatir aghāyoḥ | ava sthirā maghavan
    jastanuṣya mṛḍus tokātha tanayāya mṛḍaya ||

    May the weapon (heti) of Rudra pass us by and spare us;
    may the wicked intent of the blazing one who desires evil (aghāyoḥ) circle away from us.
    O bountiful one (maghavan), lay down your firm (sthirā) missile.
    Be gentle toward our offspring (toka) and bring joy to our son (tanaya).

Now the ninth mantra — beginning "pari ṇo rudrasya" (may the weapon of Rudra pass us by). May the weapon (hetiḥ, the missile) of Rudra pass us by (parivṛṇaktu) and leave us alone — may it never enter us. But since it seems impossible to deflect the weapon when the destroyer has the intent to destroy, the prayer continues — "pari tveṣasya" (may the wicked intent also pass by). Of aghāyoḥ — meaning: one who desires harm (agha, sin) as the instrument of his anger; of the blazing (tveṣasya) Rudra who is inflamed by wrath — may even his "durmatir" (wicked intent, the intent to slay) also pass around us. The sequence is: sin arising from non-performance of enjoined acts and from performance of prohibited acts; from that, the anger of the Supreme Lord; from that, the intent to destroy; from that, the infliction of suffering by the Supreme Lord's instruments — in the form of the means of this-worldly and otherworldly suffering, such as time, place, person, etc.; and finally, the experience of pain. Thus the entire cycle from sin to the suffering of its consequences is what is being prayed against here. But the weapon of the Lord is irresistible and unerring — how then can it be averted? To this he answers — "ava sthirā" (lay down the firm one). O mīḍvas (you who shower upon those who bow to you — this being a vocative that contains the reason within itself) —
