122                    Sri Rudra Bhashyam

---

He, having been disrespected by the Lord, commenced his sacrifice. Virabhadra (a fierce emanation of Shiva) rushed upon him — Daksha's head was severed, the sacrificial hall was burned down, oblations were thrown into the fire-pits, the sacred fires were destroyed, the sacrificial posts were uprooted and used to strike the assembled divinities, Chamunda (a goddess) was lashed, Bhrigu's beard was torn off, Pushan's teeth were broken, and Bhaga's eyes were gouged out. What tremendous destruction was wrought! At that moment, none of them had any protector. Therefore, disrespect toward the Supreme Lord is the cause of great calamity, and so His worship must absolutely be performed — such is the meaning.

           Namo vrikshebhyo harikesha bhyah
           (Salutation to the trees with green-haired foliage)

Not only from fear of adversity on the part of opponents is the Lord worthy of worship; but also because, in this world, He sustains all sacrifices by manifesting as the palasha (flame-of-the-forest), bilva (bel tree), ashvattha (sacred fig) and other trees, and in the next world, He sustains all the enjoyments of heaven by manifesting as the wishing-tree (kalpaka-vriksha) — therefore He is to be taken refuge in by all of His devotees. This is shown by the seventh mantra: "Namo vrikshebhyah" etc. To those trees whose hair (kesha) is of the color green (harita) — namely the palasha leaves — salutation. By the compound "harikesha" (green-haired), it is shown that there is a glory of the Supreme Lord's divine splendor that is occasioned not only through the treehood but also through the leaf-nature (of the palasha). Therefore also: "Brahman (the Absolute) indeed is the palasha leaf; by declaring the palasha leaf, he recites the Brahman" — this shows the glory arising from the leaf-quality of the palasha, just as the Shruti on the sacredness of the palasha tree says: "Those three, three leaves of the palasha, constitute the three-footed Gayatri." Similarly for the bilva tree:
