136                    Sri Rudra Bhashyam

---

descent, O king — the earth will not bear it. I see no one other than the one bearing the trident who has the power to contain it" — from the statements in the Ramayana and other texts it is understood that bearing the Ganga is something no other can accomplish. By "kshadavira ya" is conveyed His power of valor (virya-shakti). The intention of stating all these attributes of the Lord is to affirm His unique competence to bestow happiness.

           Mrida no rudreta no bhayaskrudhi kshadavira ya
           namasa vidhema te yacchham ca yoshca manur a yaje
           pita tadashyama tatha rudra pranito u

           (O Rudra, be gracious to us; do not be angry with us; for the
           one whose enemies are overcome, we would worship You with
           salutation. What happiness and liberation Manu, our father,
           earned from You in Your favor — that too may we obtain,
           guided by You, O Rudra)

   Now the fourth mantra: "Mrida no rudra" etc. O Rudra, make us glad (mridaya) — grant us happiness. Moreover, for our sake, grant us the joy of liberation (maya, moksha-sukham, krudhi, kuru). But how can liberation be given to one so sinful as us? The text answers: "kshadavira ya." To You whose enemies — our very sins — have been destroyed; to You we render service through salutation (namasa vidhema, tvam paricara mah). To You, our sins having been cast away by salutation, our claim to liberation is undisputed, from the Shruti: "By these, truly, one becomes free from sin" — such is the meaning. And this good (artha) — in the dual form of enjoyment and liberation (bhoga and apavarga) — is not newly obtained by us; it was obtained in the past through an unbroken lineage. This is conveyed by: "yaccham ca." Our father Manu — from whom we are known as manujas (human beings), and by whose teaching of the laws of varna (social order) and ashrama (stages of life), his subjects were nurtured — that very Manu of the great fame celebrated in the Shrutis and other texts: in Your favor (pranito, when Your grace was bestowed), obtained for us both worldly enjoyment (sham) and liberation from all sorrow (yoh, moksha) through the sacrifices he performed (ayaje). All of that — may we too, O Rudra, in Your favor (tava pranitau), share in and attain: by Your grace may we follow in that path — such is the meaning. And here the two Riks (Rigvedic verses) "Imam Rudraya" and "Mrida no Rudra" together form one single mantra. The Rishi of this mantra is Markandeya. The meter is Jagati. The deity is Rudra. The meditation verse is: "Meditate upon Him seated on a divine throne, being praised by great sages, with a serene countenance, bearing the crescent moon on His head." Mastery (purashcarana-siddhi) is achieved through nine thousand repetitions (japa), preceded by one Kricchha penance. This mantra yields as its fruit — pacification of cows, sacred fords (tirtha), and other troubles.

           Ma no mahantamuta ma no arbhakam ma
           na ukshantamuta ma na ukshitam ma no'va
           dhih pitaram mota mataram priya ma nastanu-
           co rudra ririshih

           (O Rudra, do not injure the great man among us, nor the
           child; neither the one who is growing nor the one fully grown;
           do not slay our father nor our mother; do not harm what is dear
           to us, O Rudra)

   Now the fifth mantra: "Ma no mahantam" etc. O Rudra, do not injure (ma ririshih, rogadibhir ma himsih) the elder, the mature person among us. And moreover, do not injure our child (arbhakam, balam) —
