114                    Śrī Rudra Bhāṣyam

The meaning is: He is the impeller of both the states of rain and its absence. He who dwells in clouds (megheṣu) is Meghya. He who dwells in lightning (vidyuti) is Vidyutya. Īdhra (the clear autumnal sky) is that which shines with pure, unobscured brilliance (nirmelat-vena dīpyamānam śarad-ghana) — He who dwells there is Īdhrya. He who dwells in the scorching sunshine (ātape) is Ātapya. He who dwells in the wind (vāte) is Vātya. Rebha (lit. "where beings perish") is the time of dissolution, the place of cosmic dissolution (pralaya-kāla, where all creatures perish, riṣyanti naśyanti) — He who dwells there is Rebhya. Vāstavya is the animate possession such as cattle (gvādika vastu), the one who dwells in that is Vāstava. The earth designated for house-construction (gṛhanirmāṇārtho bhūmiḥ) is Vāstu — He who stands guard over that is Vāstupa (the protector of the house-site).

      This seventh anuvāka is a single mantra composed of a group of sixteen Yajur mantras, forming an inner mantra-collection of the structure consisting of salutations directed toward different aspects. Its ṛṣi (seer) is Romaśa; the chandas (metre) is Mahābṛhat; the devatā (presiding deity) is Rudra. The dhyāna (meditation verse) is: "One should meditate on the divine one who causes fearlessness with His matted locks worn freely flowing about, who has a pure and serene smile, and who is adorned with tiger-skin." This mantra bestows longevity, health, prosperity, sons, learning, and liberation. Perfection (siddhi) of the mantra is attained by reciting it one hundred times preceded by a single day of fasting. Thus ends the seventh.

      Homage to Soma and to Rudra.

      In the seventh [anuvāka] the Lord was saluted by virtue of His being the Soul of all and His inner presence in all; in the eighth, He is saluted with seventeen [mantras] by virtue of His exclusive attributes which are the reasons why all worlds should worship Him, together with His immanence as the inner dweller. Among these, the first mantra establishes that since the Supreme Lord alone is the bestower of liberation, He alone is to be worshipped by all who desire liberation — "Namo somāya" — here the primary connection is "namaḥ rudrāya";
