SRI RUDRA BHASHYAM.                       51

— "Girisha": He who dwells (shete) in speech (giri) that has the form of a
vow (pratijnya) and extends (tanoti) welfare (sham, liberation) to people is
Girisha (the Lord of the Mountain/of Speech). [The meaning is:] even without
the labors of shravana (hearing) and the rest, simply through the aspiration
for liberation that arises from salutation to the Lord and from the mere
recitation of the Shri Rudra — which consists of the Lord's divine names —
liberation is attained. [This is confirmed by] the Shruti: "etair hi va amrito
bhavati" (by these [names/mantras] alone one indeed becomes immortal). Such
is the purport of the second mode of address.

The seer of this mantra is of the Svara lineage; the meter is Trishtup-
Anushtup (a mixed meter); the deity is Shambhu. The dhyana-shloka is: "May
one meditate upon the Lord of all living beings, the auspicious one — smiling-
faced, wearing the crescent moon as an ornament, bearing the Ganga, with
the daughter of the mountain [Parvati] as companion, three-eyed, adorned
with ashes and serpents."

Perfection (purashcarana-siddhi) is attained by continuous recitation for three
nights without break, in a way that does not conflict with one's daily
obligatory duties. This mantra is especially efficacious for the expiation of
the sin of cow-slaughter and similar offenses.

Thus [ends] the third mantra.

        Whatever arrow, O Girishanta (He who confers welfare on those
        dwelling in the mountain), You hold in Your hand for shooting —
        make it auspicious, O Giritra (Protector of the pledge); do not
        harm our men or our cattle.

Having thus prayed in the second and third [mantras] for the attainment of
the desired [objectives], in the fourth mantra the removal of the undesired
is prayed for: "yam ishum" — O Girishanta (He who abides on the mountain
and extends welfare to the people), whatever arrow You hold in Your hand —
for what purpose? To shoot (astave) and strike down the wicked sinners; the
suffix "tave" is in the dative sense of "in order to shoot."
