70                    Śrī Rudra Bhāṣyam

---

— [the text] establishing the form of the Supreme Lord characterised by lordship over the worlds of speech and so forth — [implies that] by [the epithet] "Hiraṇyabāhave" the appropriateness of his being the lord of Indra and others, who grant speech and those worlds to the devotees, is demonstrated. Well-known indeed is the lordship of the Supreme Lord over Indra and other [divinities] of the directions, as for instance: "From all [of these] Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra and Indra are produced," "The cause is the auspicious one (śaṃsu) who possesses all the wealth of sovereignty," "It is out of fear of him that Agni and Indra" and so forth. Similarly in the Itihāsas (epics) and Purāṇas; for example in the Bhārata: "He gives to human beings and takes back again. Over Indra and all the gods, sovereignty is said to be his alone." And in the Bhāgavata: "Brahmā and all the lokāpālas (guardian deities of the worlds) created by him." And it is elaborated in detail in the Śiva Purāṇa. Thus, the salutation of the Supreme Lord in the first mantra is by way of his lordship over all the directions, through the particular qualities of Indra and the other guardians of the quarters — such is the meaning.

    "Salutation to the trees (vṛkṣebhyaḥ), to the Hirikeśa-ones (hirikeśebhyaḥ), salutation to the lord of all living beings (paśūnāṃ pataye namaḥ)."

Now the second [mantra]: "Namo vṛkṣebhyaḥ iti" — Here, the primary syntactic connection is "paśūnāṃ pataye" (to the lord of living beings). The word "paśu" here does not refer to cattle alone, but to all animate beings, whether two-footed or four-footed. [This is established by the Vedic text]: "The lord of the livestock (paśupati) is the lord of these — four-footed beings and two-footed beings"; and "These are all the paśus: the two-footed and the four-footed" — from such Vedic texts. Thus the meaning is: to the lord of all living beings. Now, concerning the question of how creatures can be "paśu" (livestock/bound beings) in relation to the Lord, and how the Lord can be their "pati" (lord/owner), in order to establish this [relationship], "vṛkṣebhyo hirikeśebhyaḥ" is stated. Here, [one interpretation is:] hiri = of tawny colour; keśāḥ = leaves (palāśa-rūpāḥ); those trees whose leaves are of tawny colour — salutation to those trees of the form of Hari (or: of golden hue). And salutation to the lord of living beings too — [with] this the old narrative interpretation is refuted. In this [latter] reading, since vṛkṣa (tree) does not serve to establish pāśupatya (the doctrine of paśupati, lordship over the bound), there is no connection with "paśūnāṃ pataye," nor is there any appropriateness in the context of sarveśvaratva (all-lordship) in proclaiming tree-nature, nor is there any purpose to the qualifier "hirikeśebhyaḥ," and further, since "namo vṛkṣebhyo hirikeśebhyo namastārāya" (salutation to the trees, to the Hirikeśa ones, to the life-raft) will be stated later, there would be redundancy. Therefore, a special meaning must be here. Let us show it: the word "vṛkṣa" here refers to the tree of saṃsāra (worldly existence), as from the Vedic texts: "With roots above and branches below," "Vṛkṣaṃ yo veda samprati" (whoever knows the tree in truth), "Ahaṃ vṛkṣasya rerivā" (I am the sprouter of the tree) — and from the Smṛti: "With the Unmanifest as its root, with the intellect as its trunk, with sense faculties as its inner hollow; with branches above and roots below — this is the imperishable Aśvattha" and so forth. In this context too, in the later mantra "bhavasya hettyai jagatāṃ pataye namaḥ," the Supreme Lord's role as the sword that severs saṃsāra has already implied that saṃsāra has the nature of a tree. The word "Hirikeśa" likewise —
