SRI RUDRA BHASHYAM.                       55

[Continuing the commentary on the sixth mantra "adhyabocat..."]

Those who are fierce, relentless, and unvanquishable — the servants of
Yama and other deities — and those who are instruments of delivering the
fruits of that wicked person's sins, [as well as] other gods — how would
the averting of their [inflicted] misfortunes be possible? Not knowing this,
the [devotee] desires to know the remedy; [the Lord] declares that all of
them are incapable and powerless [on their own]:

"adhyabocat" — adhivacana is speaking in favor of, championing [a cause]:
as [confirmed by] the Brahmana, "when a brahmin goes before the world,
he should declare [the cause of the brahmin]." The meaning here is: He who
is by nature an adhivakta (advocate, champion) of devotees — that is,
foremost and supreme; daivya — dwelling among the gods, meaning the
indwelling controller of the gods; bhishak — the physician, the healer of
all the afflictions of worldly existence such as illness and others. [As the
Shruti says:] "bhishaktamam tva bhishajam shrinomi" (I hear You are the
greatest physician among physicians). Such a Lord, adhy abocat — has
proclaimed [His partisanship]. What does He do [while proclaiming]?
Sambhayan — destroying all ahis (serpents and other visible assailants
including thieves and tigers) and all yatudhanyah — classes of yatudha
beings; those who are invisible assailants like rakshasas, pishachas, and
others — while destroying them, He has proclaimed [His protection].

Here, [if one objects:] "How can a Lord who is the same toward all make
a partisan proclamation in your favor? Does this not lead to partiality
(vaishanya)?" — to dispel this objection, the word adhivakta is used.
The Lord's declaration on behalf of devotees is motivated by the devotees'
act of devotion; hence it brings no fault upon the Lord. "Vaishanya-
nairghrnye na sapekshatvat" (partiality and cruelty do not apply, because
of [the Lord's actions being conditioned by] devotees' actions) — such is
the principle here.

Even though the Lord champions [His devotees'] cause, there might be the
fear: "will not the suffering resulting from the actions of Yama and other
independent deities still occur?" To remove this doubt, prathama (foremost)
is used: [scriptural passages confirm the Lord's supremacy:] "yo devanam
prathamah" (He who is foremost among gods); "tameshvaranam prathamam
maheshvaram" (the foremost of all lords, the great Lord); "yo devah
sarvadeveshu mahadeva iti smritah, tasmai namastuh kurvana divi tishthanti
devatah" (the gods known among all gods as Mahadeva — those who
salute Him dwell in heaven). Since the one who champions [the devotee's
cause] is the foremost of all gods, there is no room for fear of suffering
caused by subordinate gods.

Not only [freedom from] suffering caused by other gods, but [the devotee
also attains] the status of being worshipped by all gods — because, by
virtue of the Lord being the indwelling controller (antaryami) of all those
gods, the singular supreme deity who has become a partisan advocate [of
the devotee] — this is indicated by the word "daivyah," which implies the
Lord's quality of being the indwelling controller of all gods.

Through the word "bhishak" (physician), and through the analogy of the
physician from the Shiva Purana — "a physician who knows diagnosis causes
harm to the patient through surgery, cauterization, and the like, but here
there is no cruelty; compassion alone motivates him" — the supreme
compassion of the Lord is expressed. And thereby, even while striking the
ahis and yatudhanyahs, His compassion toward even those beings is implied.
Just as a surgeon (vrana-vaidya), though momentarily causing suffering to
the wounded through surgery and cauterization, yet heals the patient's
wounds and thus brings happiness — and is therefore compassionate — so
too the Lord who is the samsara-vaidya (physician of worldly existence),
even while striking the ahis and yatudhanyahs, by removing the sins that
are the cause of their future birth and thus purifying them, progressively
brings them to happiness — therefore His compassion is not diminished.

[The text shows that:] since He declares [His protection] — saying "adhy
abocat" (He has declared), not "jambhayatu" (may He destroy) — the Lord's
faultless sovereignty is demonstrated. Not the manner of a subordinate who,
incapable of subduing the ahis and yatudhanyahs himself, propitiates them
and intercedes for the devotee saying "please spare this one who is mine"
— but rather: Himself capable, first protecting the devotee by destroying
the ahis and yatudhanyahs, [then] when the gods come asking "how should
this sinner be protected?", making the partisan declaration "This one is
mine — what sin does he have?" — hence even great sinners [are protected].
Stories of hunters and others whose Yama-messengers were destroyed by the
Lord's divine emissaries, and who were brought to Kailasa, and to whom
Yama and Chitragupta reported their deeds — and to whom the Lord replied:
"Even if inadvertently, these have performed acts such as throwing bilva
leaves [at My image] and prostrations; therefore they are Mine and you
have no authority over them" — such stories are repeatedly told in the
Puranas.

With this understanding, in this mantra "raksha ca no adhi ca deva bruhi"
(protect us, and then champion our cause, O God) — protection comes first,
then the declaration of partisanship — this is the sequence shown. Thus
this mantra is the remover of all afflictions from serpents, rakshasas,
pishachas, and all other beings. Hence its designation as a kavacha
(armor/protective formula) — as stated by the revered Bodhayana:
"adhyabocat iti kavacham" (the mantra 'adhyabocat' is the protective armor).
