40                    SRI RUDRA BHASHYAM

— both anuvaka (sections) [constitute] "pratipurusa." Having recited them,
one should touch the three eyes [of the image] with the gesture "namah to the
three eyes, vaushat." [Then:] The anuvaka "svam agne rudra" and likewise the
anuvaka "deva deveshu shrayadhvam" [constitute] the Shataraudriya. Although
in the anuvaka "svam agne rudra" there is strictly speaking no ground for
applying the term Shataraudriya as previously defined, nonetheless the term
is assigned to it on account of: the universality of the deity ("vishve devash
cha netuh"), the mantra "yujam vrinishvasya" being identified as "pausnayetena"
on account of its Pushna-character; the mantra "shadrchas tvame" having a
connection with Rudra through a reduced nominal stem alone (laghu-pratipadika-
yoga), which yields the character of a lunar deity (lu-daiva-sattva); the mantra
"mano devi" etc. bearing an element of the nominal stem of a Shanid deity,
and therefore bearing the character of a Shanid deity; and also for Agni-deity
passages — the view that "svam agne rudra" is a Shataraudriya text is held
simply by virtue of the occurrence of the word "rudra." In truth, however, the
designation "Shataraudriya" for the anuvaka "svam agne rudra" is because Agni,
who is its subject, is praised there in the form of the Shataraudriya.

The designation of the anuvaka "deva deveshu" as Shataraudriya is to be
understood from the fact that the statement "deva agnir ekadashabhir shadbhih
iti" treats Agni as the Shataraudriya subject, and some of the meanings of
individual verses are traceable [to Rudra themes]. Having recited both those
anuvaka-s, one should perform the nyasa at the weapon with "namah to the
weapon, phat." This is the fifth nyasa.

Now the action to be performed after the five-limbed nyasa is stated: "One
should whisper (sankusha) the five-limbed [sequence] and then perform the
eight-limbed prostration." One should whisper the five-limbed [mantras]
beginning with Sadyojata; then one should perform the ashtanga (eight-limbed)
prostration. Those eight mantras are stated: "Hiranyagarbhah," "yah pranatah,"
"brahmajajnanam," "mahi dyauh," "vapash casac," "agne
