Second Anuvāka

    "Salutation to the golden-armed one (Hiraṇyabāhave), to the leader of armies (Senānye), and to the lord of the directions (diśāṃ ca pataye namaḥ)."

Thus in the First Anuvāka, the Blessed Lord along with his retinue was propitiated through fifteen mantras. Now, in the Second and subsequent eight anuvākas, the Blessed Lord is saluted in his form as the Lord of all (sarveśvara) and as the indwelling self of all (sarvāntaryāmin). Beginning here [with this mantra] and extending through "abhayaḥ apatisyaśca vo namaḥ," all mantras have the structure of salutations (namaskāra) both at the beginning and end. In each mantra, "namas" appears at the beginning and "namaḥ" at the end, making each a single complete mantra — for example: "namo hiraṇyabāhave senānye diśāṃ ca pataye namaḥ." The same holds for those that follow. Now then, in order to establish the universal lordship (sarveśvartva) of the Lord by first demonstrating his sovereignty over individual things within the manifest world, the commentary begins: "Namo hiraṇyabāhave iti" — Hiraṇyabāhave: to the one whose arms are adorned with golden armlets (keyūra) and the like. The mention of arms (bāhu) is also indicative [of the whole body]: from head to foot his entire divine auspicious form is of a golden hue, endowed with supremely celestial golden ornaments — thus do the Vedic texts proclaim. For example: "Namo hiraṇyabāhave hiraṇyavarṇāya" (salutation to the golden-armed, golden-coloured one), "Ābhraṇakhāt sarve suvarṇaiḥ" (all [his limbs] are golden from ornament to skin), "Yadāpamayaḥ paśyate rukmavarṇam" (when the sage perceives him of golden colour) — and so forth. The Smṛti texts too: "Rukmārsaṃ svapravīgamyam" (perceivable by one of purified mind), "Cārucāmīkarābhāsam" (resplendent like beautiful gold) — and so forth.

Senānye: the senānī is one who leads armies (senā nayati — the one who leads the host). He is the lord of the various armies in the form of the aggregations of all divine beings (devādinā) assembled to combat the sufferings of the world. In the Āśvalāyana school, introducing Śiva, it is stated: "All consecrations (nāmadheyāni) indeed belong to him; all armies (senāḥ) and all standards (ucchrāyaṇāni)." Thus, as senānī, and also as the lord of the directions (diśāṃ — from east onwards, pataye — to the lord), may there be salutation. [The grammatical rule] "ṣaṣṭhīyuktaścha chandasi vā" accounts for the ghi-designation (a special grammatical form). Here the primary syntactic connection is "diśāṃ pataye namaḥ." Now, how is the Supreme Lord the lord of the directions, when Indra, Agni and others are lords of the directions? To dispel this doubt, "Senānye" has been specified — through which it is shown that it is the Supreme Lord, as the overlord of all the hosts of divine beings, who has lordship over the directions; Indra and the others are merely lords of their respective directions by his command. And regarding the question of how the Supreme Lord can be lord over Indra and the others, "Hiraṇyabāhu" is specified — by which the form of the Supreme Lord that is worshipped in the Antara-Āditya vidyā (the meditative practice of [the Lord] within the sun) is meant, as [the Vedic text states]: "He who is that golden-hued person within the sun (ya eṣo'ntarāditye hiraṇmayaḥ puruṣaḥ)." Hence the application of "namo hiraṇyabāhave" in the Antara-Āditya vidyā is made in the Purāṇas and other texts. "Those worlds above, and whatever there are of the worlds [below] — he is the lord of those, and of whatever they desire for themselves" — thus the Antara-Āditya vidyā —
