---
6                              Sri Rudra Bhashyam.
---

[Continuing the Introduction — on the glory of Rudradhyaya:]

...the world became turned away from Shri Rudra, afflicted by those [daughters of Disbelief] named Ashraddha (lack of faith) and Durmedha (poor intellect). Those passages [from the Purana] will be cited at the appropriate place in this work. Therefore it is established: this section of the Jabala Upanishad, further corroborated by the Kurma Purana, declares the Rudradhyaya to be supreme over all the Vedas. This meaning will indeed be understood in the hearts of scholars.

The Parashara Purana adds its corroboration: "The Jabala Upanishad speaks for the sake of [attaining] my knowledge; it teaches with care the primary means of liberation for living beings. Avimukta (Kashi) is my supreme and holy kshetra (sacred ground). Recitation of the Shataraudriya and excellent renunciation (sannyasa) are the primary means" — by this, the Jabala Shruti's meaning that the Shataraudriya is a means toward knowledge [and liberation] is stated most explicitly. And there, the phrase "paramam mama" (my supreme [seat]) qualifies "Avimukta" — meaning that it is supreme by the name Pranava (OM) — as the Shruti declares: "Here, as the life-breaths depart from a being, Rudra imparts to him the Taraka Brahman (the liberating knowledge of Brahman), by which he becomes immortal and is liberated." Thus among upasanas (meditative practices), the upasana at Avimukta; among things to be recited, the Shataraudriya; and among ashrams (stages of life), sannyasa — these three are declared by the revered Parashara to be the foremost means of knowledge [and liberation]. This demonstrates [the Shataraudriya's] supremacy over all the Vedas; the Jabala Shruti, corroborated by that Purana, is the authority here.

Furthermore, in the Kaivalya Upanishad alone, the Self-existent Brahma teaches the supreme Brahman-Atman identity to Ashvalayana and then teaches this [text] as the means to it: "He who studies the Shataraudriya becomes purified as if by fire, purified from the sin of drinking liquor, purified from the sin of brahminicide, purified from the sin of things done and left undone — and therefore he becomes entitled to dwell in Avimukta (the eternal abode). One of whatever ashram should always recite the Rudra, or at least once. By this, one attains knowledge — the destroyer of the ocean of samsara."

Here the first injunction is: "One who desires knowledge that liberates from samsara should recite the Shataraudriya." And in this context, when one asks what reason there could be for teaching the Shataraudriya as the means of knowledge, to the exclusion of all else in the vast ocean of the Veda consisting of the karma-kanda, upasana-kanda, and jnana-kanda — the text first demonstrates its supremacy over the karma-kanda (the portion dealing with ritual action) through the words from "He who studies the Shataraudriya" up to "purified from things done and left undone."

This is corroborated in the Suta Samhita: "He who, performing brahmacharya (celibacy) together with a partner, daily practices the Shataraudriya — he is freed from being burned in fire, from drinking liquor, from doing what ought not to be done, and from brahminicide — thus say the followers of the Kaivalya branch." Here, "from doing what ought not to be done" (akrtyacharanat) explains the phrase "purified from things done and left undone" (krtyakrtyat puto bhavati) — "krityakritya" means "that which, though done as if a ritual act, is in fact an improper deed," i.e., the performance of a forbidden act; "purified from that" is the meaning. Thus the intent of the Shruti is shown: the student of the Rudradhyaya is not only purified from brahminicide and liquor drinking, but from all sins whatsoever.

This meaning is elaborated at length in the Brahma-uttara-khanda. There:
